
The Handbook of Music Therapy
Music therapists work with children and adults of all ages with wide-ranging health-
care needs. This handbook traces the history of recent developments in music ther-
apy and the range of current applications, outlining practical requirements for the
work and some basic prerequisites for and philosophies of training.
The Handbook of Music Therapy covers material encompassing clinical, practical
and theoretical perspectives, and is divided into four main sections, including:
•
The recent evolution of music therapy as a paramedical discipline complement-
ing the more traditional areas of child and adult health care
•
A clinical section including contributions from music therapy specialists in the
ﬁelds of autism, adult learning disability, forensic psychiatry, neurology and 
dementia
•
A section on resources necessary to practise as a music therapist including musi-
cal illustrations and practical examples
•
A focus on issues pertinent to the life of the professional music therapist includ-
ing job creation, supervision, further training and research.
The Handbook of Music Therapy is illustrated with many case studies and clinical
examples throughout, placed within a variety of different theoretical and philosophical
perspectives. It will be invaluable to music therapists, other arts therapists and to
clinicians such as speech and language therapists, psychotherapists, psychiatrists and
social workers.
Leslie Bunt is Visiting Professor of Music Therapy at the University of the West of
England where he directs the MusicSpace Trust. He directs the postgraduate
Diploma in Music Therapy at the University of Bristol and is the author of Music
Therapy: An Art Beyond Words (1994).
Sarah Hoskyns is Head of the Music Therapy Department at the Guildhall School
of Music and Drama, London. She is a former editor of the British Journal of Music
Therapy and an Approved Supervisor and Advisory Council member of the
Association of Professional Music Therapists.
Contributors: Jonathan Barnes, Richard Bolton, Sandra Brown, Cathy Durham, Helen
Odell-Miller, Julian Raphael, Ann Sloboda, Tessa Watson.

This page intentionally left blank

The Handbook of 
Music Therapy
Edited by Leslie Bunt and 
Sarah Hoskyns

First published 2002 
27 Church Road, Hove, East Sussex BN3 2FA
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
© 2002 Selection and editorial matter; Leslie Bunt and Sarah Hoskyns. 
Individual chapters; the contributors. Plates 1, 2, 3, 16.3 and 16.4;
Jonathan Barnes.
Typeset in Times by Graphicraft Limited, Hong Kong
This publication has been produced with paper manufactured to strict
environmental standards and with pulp derived from sustainable forests.
Paperback cover image ‘A Way In Through Music’ by Jonathan Barnes
(inspired by a sculpture by Barbara Hepworth)
Paperback cover design by Louise Page
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or
reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, 
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter 
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any 
information storage or retrieval system, without permission in 
writing from the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available 
from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
The handbook of music therapy / edited by Leslie Bunt and Sarah
Hoskyns.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references (p. ) and index.
ISBN 0-415-15707-2 — ISBN 0-415-15708-0 (pbk.)
1. Music therapy.
I. Bunt, Leslie.
II. Hoskyns, Sarah, 1959–
615.8′5154—dc21
2002025442
by Routledge
by Routledge
ML3920.H266 2002
ISBN13: 978-0-415-15707-0 (hbk)
ISBN13: 978-0-415-15708-7 (pbk)
711 Third Avenue, New York NY 10017
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business

In memory of Maggie Pickett, colleague, teacher and friend
(1928–2000).
T
o Benedict Hoskyns who always believed that ‘such a
manual should be written’.

This page intentionally left blank

Contents
List of illustrations
xiii
List of contributors
xvi
Acknowledgements
xviii
Introduction
1
LESLIE BUNT AND SARAH HOSKYNS
PART I
Background and context
7
1
Setting the scene
9
LESLIE BUNT AND SARAH HOSKYNS
Introduction 9
Current music therapy practice 10
A survey of some recent literature 19
Qualities needed to train and practise as a music therapist 25
Summary 26
2
Practicalities and basic principles of music therapy
27
LESLIE BUNT AND SARAH HOSKYNS
Introduction 27
Clinical example 28
A practical working frame for music therapy 29
Boundaries 32
The qualities of the therapeutic relationship 35
Some features drawn from psychoanalytic theory 39
The music therapy spectrum 44
Essential ‘Is’ of music therapy practice 45
Summary 51

viii
The handbook of music therapy
3
First meetings with four music therapists
53
LESLIE BUNT AND SARAH HOSKYNS
Introduction 53
Formative musical and personal experiences 55
Motivation to train and training experiences 58
Concluding note 64
PART II
Clinical chapters
67
Introduction
69
LESLIE BUNT AND SARAH HOSKYNS
4
Suzanna’s story: Music therapy with a pre-school child
71
LESLIE BUNT
Introduction 71
Suzanna’s story 73
Concluding points 83
5
‘Hullo object! I destroyed you!’
84
SANDRA BROWN
Term one: exploration 86
Term two: control 89
Term three: the developing relationship 90
Term four: together in musical experience 92
Term ﬁve: struggle 94
Term six: ending 95
6
Music therapy with adults with learning disabilities
97
TESSA WATSON
Introduction 97
Learning disabilities – a history 97
A literature review 99
An overview 100
Theoretical framework 102
Theory into practice 103
Clinical work 105
Conclusion 114

Contents
ix
7
Music therapy and neurology
115
CATHY DURHAM
Introduction 115
Neuro-disability 115
How does music affect the brain? 116
Clinical examples 118
Summary 130
Further music therapy reading 131
8
Music therapy in forensic psychiatry: a case study with 
musical commentary
132
ANN SLOBODA AND RICHARD BOLTON
Introduction 132
Music therapy in forensic psychiatry 133
Musical commentary 143
Discussion 147
Summary 148
9
Musical narratives in music therapy treatment for dementia
149
HELEN ODELL-MILLER
Introduction 149
Cognitive and neurological considerations 149
Research 150
Musical narrative and improvisation 151
Further theoretical considerations 154
Conclusion 155
Postscript to Part II
157
LESLIE BUNT AND SARAH HOSKYNS
PART III
Training
161
Introduction
163
LESLIE BUNT AND SARAH HOSKYNS
10
Evolving a capacity for wondering: the development of 
observation and listening skills
167
SARAH HOSKYNS
Introduction 167
Section 1: Some reference points for observation and listening 169

x
The handbook of music therapy
Section 2: Some strategies for focusing observation and listening 
in music therapy training 175
Section 3: An enquiry into approaches to observation and 
listening by music therapists at different levels of experience 
and training 184
Summary 188
11
Beginning the clinical journey
189
LESLIE BUNT AND SARAH HOSKYNS
Introduction 189
The initial musical connection 190
Fundamental therapeutic and personal issues 203
Concluding points 215
12
Developing the musical journey
216
JULIAN RAPHAEL, LESLIE BUNT AND SARAH HOSKYNS
Introduction 216
Practical music exercises 217
On listening to music 231
Summary 233
Postscript to Part III
235
LESLIE BUNT AND SARAH HOSKYNS
PART IV
Professional life
239
Introduction
241
LESLIE BUNT AND SARAH HOSKYNS
13
The professional music therapist
245
LESLIE BUNT AND SARAH HOSKYNS
Introduction 245
Some commonly asked questions 245
Referral, assessment and report-writing 249
Ending therapy 258
The necessity of regular supervision 260
Further routes for education and training 267
Summary 268

Contents
xi
14
Some reﬂections on music therapy research: an example of 
collaborative enquiry
270
LESLIE BUNT
Introduction 270
Some current patterns in music therapy research 271
Some roots of these patterns: further thoughts on quantitative and 
qualitative methodologies 274
How can different approaches exist side by side? 277
Example: a collaborative study of the music therapy programme 
at the Bristol Cancer Help Centre (BCHC) 279
Conclusion 288
15
Transformation, Ovid and Guided Imagery and Music (GIM)
290
LESLIE BUNT
Introduction 290
What is GIM? 291
Transformation in GIM 292
A further note on emotion and music 294
Each client’s unique journey and pattern 294
An example of a pattern in a series of GIM sessions 295
Some connections between music and image in one session 298
Examples from other sessions 301
Articulation of the patterns in improvised music 303
Summary of Kay’s pattern 305
Conclusion 306
Endnotes
308
LESLIE BUNT AND SARAH HOSKYNS
Introduction 308
On our links with music 308
Some gender issues in music therapy 310
Some pointers on the future development of music therapy as a 
profession 316
A ﬁnal return to our key responsibilities: to witness and to listen 318
Appendix I
321
Approved postgraduate music therapy training courses in the UK
Appendix II
323
Resources

xii
The handbook of music therapy
Appendix III
325
Association of Professional Music Therapists (APMT): Code of 
Professional Ethics and Discipline
Bibliography
328
Name index
343
Subject index
347

Illustrations
PLATES
Introduction
Plate 1
Entrance to St George’s Asinou, Kakapetria, 
Cyprus (Jonathan Barnes)
1
Plate 2
Entrance to tomb at Muglish, Kazanluk (Jonathan Barnes)
5
Plate 3
HM Prison, Holloway, London (Jonathan Barnes)
6
Chapter 2
Plate 2.1
A music therapy group room
31
Plate 2.2
A relaxation room adapted for music therapy
31
Chapter 15
Plate 15.1
Thetis escaping Peleus – transforming into 
ﬁre, water, a lion and a serpent (from the 
base of a Greek cup signed by Pethinos – 
late sixth century BC)
307
Endnotes
Plate 16.1
‘Thus did Job continually’. Plate number 1 
from The Book of Job by William Blake 
(Copyright The British Museum)
311
Plate 16.2
‘So the Lord blessed the latter end of Job 
more than the beginning’. Plate number 21 
from The Book of Job by William Blake 
(Copyright the British Museum)
312
Plate 16.3
West entrance to St George’s Asinou 
Kakapetria, Cyprus (Jonathan Barnes)
315

xiv
The handbook of music therapy
Plate 16.4
Entrance to St. Gabriel’s Chapel, Exeter 
Cathedral (Jonathan Barnes)
319
FIGURES
2.1
The music therapy space
27
2.2
The music therapy spectrum
44
6.1
Segment 1
107
6.2
Segment 2
109
6.3
Segment 3
113
7.1
Synchronising of phrasing with Simeon’s breathing
119
7.2
Improvised voice and guitar
121
7.3
Tom’s ‘rugby’ rhythm
123
7.4
Joint play: Tom and Cathy
125
8.1
Extract 1: Second music therapy session
138
8.2
Extract 2: Final music therapy session after
8 months of work
141
10.1
Transcripts of short extracts of a music therapy session 
with Child N
181
12.1
Common modes
218
12.2
Pentatonic sets from other musical cultures
219
12.3
Varied starting points for improvisation
220
12.4
Accompaniment patterns
222
12.5
One-note turnarounds
223
12.6
Simple 12-bar blues
224
12.7
12-bar blues with walking bass
225
12.8
Two-chord vamps
226
12.9
Rhythmic grooves
227
12.10
Exploration of song and accompaniment style: 
‘Amazing Grace’
230
13.1
Referral form for adults
250
13.2
Audio/video consent form
252
TABLES
1.1
Areas of work and ranked numbers of therapists
14
1.2
Combined areas of interest and ranked numbers of 
therapists
15
10.1
Prompts and ideas for general observation on 
clinical placements
176
10.2
Case notes on music therapy group work with 
probation clients
178

Illustrations
xv
10.3
Results of observation and listening at three stages of 
experience
186
12.1
Opening bars of the Marcello example
231
14.1
Some implicit assumptions within quantitative and 
qualitative approaches
276

Contributors
Jonathan Barnes is Senior Lecturer in Education at Christ Church Uni-
versity College, Canterbury. He is a past Head Teacher of St. Peter’s
Methodist Primary School and has held a lifelong passion for the arts in
the curriculum. He is a keen practising musician and artist.
Richard Bolton gained an M.Mus. from the University of Shefﬁeld research-
ing jazz improvisation following study at Oxford University and the
Guildhall School of Music and Drama. As part of a busy career as a free-
lance musician and teacher, he teaches improvisation to music therapy
trainees at the Guildhall School.
Sandra Brown trained as a music therapist at the Nordoff-Robbins Music
Therapy Centre, London and has worked with a wide range of clients. She
now works as Senior Therapist at the Centre and as Senior Clinical Tutor
on the Centre’s Master of Music Therapy degree course. She also main-
tains a private supervision practice. She is currently training as a Jungian
analyst with the Society of Analytical Psychology in London.
Leslie Bunt is visiting Professor of Music Therapy at the University of the
West of England. He directs the postgraduate music therapy course at 
the University of Bristol (also based in Bologna). He has wide clinical 
experience with children and adults and is currently working with cancer
patients and in Guided Imagery and Music. He is the Director of The
MusicSpace Trust, a registered charity setting up a network of music 
therapy centres. He is a Vice-President of the BSMT, a member of the
Advisory Council of the APMT and an Approved Supervisor.
Cathy Durham is currently Research Fellow in Music Therapy at the
University of the West of England. She teaches on the Bristol and Cardiff
training courses. Her areas of clinical experience are in neurology and learn-
ing disabilities. She has a special interest in music therapy group work.
Sarah Hoskyns is Head of Music Therapy Department and Director of the
postgraduate music therapy course at Guildhall School of Music and Drama.

Contributors
xvii
She has a special interest in working with families and young children and
has clinical and research experience with clients in the probation service
and in neuro-disability. She is a member of the management board of
MusicSpace London. She is a former editor of the British Journal of Music
Therapy, an Approved Supervisor and an Advisory Council member of
APMT. She also acts as APMT representative to the Health Professions
Council on training and education.
Helen Odell-Miller is Director of the MA, and postgraduate diploma pro-
gramme in Music Therapy at Anglia Polytechnic University, Cambridge,
UK, and a Senior Music Therapist and researcher in music therapy at
Addenbrookes NHS Trust Mental Health Services. Her M.Phil. research
studied the outcome of music therapy treatment for elderly mentally ill
patients, particularly focusing on those with dementia. She is a founder
member of the European Music Therapy Committee, and in the UK she
is a past chair of the Association of Professional Music Therapists, and
Post Diploma Supervision Panel; and presently Adviser to the Depart-
ment of Health on Music Therapy.
Julian Raphael is Senior Lecturer in Music at Canterbury Christ Church
University College and Programme Director of the Course in Popular Music
and Technology. He is an active conductor, composer and arranger of 
music for The Maridadi Singers and directs the College’s Salsa Band. 
He is visiting choral tutor to the UK Dalcroze Society. He has a special
interest in rhythmic improvisation and inter-cultural music.
Ann Sloboda is currently Head of Arts Therapies at Three Bridges Regional
Secure Unit, West London Mental Healthcare Trust. She is a former Chair
of the APMT, a member of the Advisory Council and a recent member
of the Arts Therapies Board of the Council for Professions Supplement-
ary to Medicine (CPSM).
Tessa Watson has worked in the area of learning disabilities since qualify-
ing in 1990 and has a special interest in working with clients with pro-
found and multiple learning disabilities. She currently works in a Health
and Social Services Community Team for People with Learning Disabilit-
ies in London. Tessa also teaches on the Roehampton music therapy course.
She maintains a keen interest in professional issues and has worked on
the APMT executive committee in various roles.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank above all the many children and adults who have
helped us to understand the processes of music therapy and to thank the
staff at the various clinical settings where we have worked. We give our appre-
ciation to our students and colleagues on the music therapy courses at the
Guildhall School of Music and Drama, London and the University of
Bristol (both British and Italian groups). Special thanks are due to the fol-
lowing people. To our contributors: Sandra Brown, Cathy Durham, Helen
Odell-Miller, Julian Raphael (who notated on computer all the musical
examples in the text using Sibelius software), Ann Sloboda, Richard Bolton
and Tessa Watson, and to our interviewees: Jean Eisler, Helen Odell-Miller,
Elaine Streeter and Tony Wigram. To Jonathan Barnes and Julian Raphael
who helped bring the text alive with original pictures and music. To Steve
Dunachie for musical ideas for Chapter 12. To the Principal and Research
Committee of the Guildhall School of Music and Drama for research fund-
ing. To staff of Bristol MusicSpace for advice with Appendix II and the forms
in Chapter 13. To staff at MusicSpace West Midlands for information 
on music therapy provision in schools. To staff of the National Ofﬁce of
The MusicSpace Trust for their support in the ﬁnal stages of the prepara-
tion of the manuscript. To Diana Asbridge and Denize Christophers,
Administrators of the APMT and BSMT. To Karin Richards for assistance
with transcribing and typing and for helpful advice. To Karen Ryan for admin-
istrative support and to Rachel Darnley-Smith for moral support. To Tim
Raphael for advice on poetry. To Benedict and Ann Hoskyns for reading
part of the manuscript. To Gabrielle Rifkind, consultant supervisor, for new
ideas and old wisdom. To the Royal Society of Arts for provision of work-
ing space and to the proprietors of cafés in Bristol, Canterbury and London
where we have passed many hours in planning and discussion. To Dr Kate
Cullen for compiling the index. To our families: Sue Pontin, Laura and
Jonathan Bunt; Julian Raphael, Dorothy and Nino Raphael for their con-
tinued loving support.
The authors and publisher would like to thank the following for permis-
sion to reproduce copyright material:

Acknowledgements
xix
1
The Association of Professional Music Therapists: Tables 1.1 and 1.2
and Appendix III.
2 Extract from Captain Corelli’s Mandolin by Louis de Bernières published
by Vintage (May 1995). Used by permission of The Random House Group
Limited and by Random House Inc. USA (Chapter 10).
3
Two extracts from A Way of Being Free by Ben Okri published by the
Orion Publishing Group. Used by permission of Phoenix House
(Chapter 10 and Endnotes).
4
Extract from ‘The Rainstick’ from Opened Ground: Selected Poems
1966–1996 by Seamus Heaney. Copyright © 1988 by Seamus Heaney.
Reprinted by permission of Farrar, Straus and Giroux, LLC and Faber
& Faber. (Chapter 11).
5
Extract from ‘Piano’ from Selected Poems of D.H. Lawrence. Used by
permission of the Estate of D.H. Lawrence.
6
Extract from ‘This is not love perhaps’ by A.S.J. Tessimond. Used by
permission of Whiteknights Press, Department of English, University of
Reading.
7
The Editor of The British Journal of Music Therapy for reproduction 
of earlier published research material from Vol. 14, No. 2 (2000)
(Chapter 14).
8
The Editor of the Journal of the Association for Music and Imagery for
permission to use material from Vol. 7 (2000) (Chapter 15).
9
Plate at end of Chapter 15: From a Greek cup: Peleus seizing Thetis –
from the Staatliche Museum and with permission from the Bildarchiv
Preussischer Kulturebesitz.
10
Plates 1 and 21 from The Book of Job by William Blake. © Copyright
The British Museum (Endnotes).
Note on conﬁdentiality
All names have been changed and identifying details disguised in order to
protect anonymity of patients described in this Handbook. In accordance
with the APMT Code of Professional Ethics and Discipline, permission has
been sought wherever possible from patients themselves or from carers to
use material from music therapy sessions.

This page intentionally left blank

Plate 1 Entrance to St George’s Asinou, Kakapetria, Cyprus (Jonathan Barnes)

Introduction
Leslie Bunt and Sarah Hoskyns
MUSIC THERAPY ON A THRESHOLD
Music therapy is at an exhilarating stage in its evolution both as a profes-
sion and an academic discipline. Gone are the days of it being an ad hoc
pursuit for the dedicated few. In many parts of the world music therapy is
now regarded as a serious clinical profession practised by well-trained and
highly motivated practitioners working within a variety of approaches and
agreed standards of ethical practice. This commitment to the profession 
and enthusiasm for the work were demonstrated at a turn-of-the-century con-
ference organised by the British Society for Music Therapy (BSMT) and the
Association of Professional Music Therapists (APMT). One of the highlights
of this two-day event was a presentation by a group of newly qualiﬁed therap-
ists from different training courses. These talented young clinicians outlined
their hopes for the future, articulated within a professional approach that
celebrated unity and diversity. Similar advances are occurring world-wide.
At the Ninth World Congress of Music Therapy, held in Washington 
in 1999, the founders of ﬁve universally acknowledged music therapy
approaches were celebrated: Mary Priestley (Analytical Music Therapy);
Clifford Madsen (Behavioural Music Therapy); Rolando Benenzon
(Benenzon Music Therapy); Paul Nordoff and Clive Robbins (Creative
Music Therapy) and Helen Bonny (Guided Imagery and Music). These
approaches were placed in the context of a wide array of presentations 
from all corners of the globe, representatives of 42 member countries of the
World Federation of Music Therapy being present at the congress.
A threshold is an interesting place to be with connotations mainly of entrance
but also of exit. It is a place where it is possible to make connections
between the past, present and future. A threshold leads from outside to inside;
it is a literal and symbolic space between different worlds; it is an image 
pregnant with anticipation, mystery and not without some superstition. A
threshold can also be a doorway or gateway to new understanding and aware-
ness. Overall the image can serve us well in introducing some themes that
will be elaborated in further chapters. It can help us pay tribute to the entrances

Introduction
3
and exits of some important persons in music therapy and the doorways 
that they opened. It can help us recall some important moments in the devel-
opment of the profession and the exploration of new pathways through
research.
We can start to explore how music, and improvisation in particular, 
can occupy this space between different worlds: a threshold between the 
inner and outer, between conscious and unconscious processes, between the
individual and the collective, between silence and sound. Even Ruud (1995)
has described improvisation as a ‘liminal’ experience – ‘limen’ being the Latin
for threshold. We can consider training as a ‘rite of passage’ across a new
threshold. Above all we can observe how our patients (interchangeable
throughout the book with clients, group members and residents with
changes in terminology linked to the context and the therapist’s clinical 
perspective) move across a threshold into a music therapy space. The music
therapist meets and attends them at the gate.1
The Roman god Janus was the ﬁrst god of all doorways: public gates through
which roads passed and also doors to private homes. What is interesting about
him is that he was represented as looking in different directions simultane-
ously with a double-faced head. He could observe both the entrances and
exits of public buildings and the exteriors and interiors of private houses.
He was the god of beginnings and endings, of representing transitions
between outside and inside, between the world of the country and the city,
between primitive life and civilisation. Interestingly for musicians Janus is
often depicted holding a key. We know of a key as a device for unlocking
and in Roman times the keystone was also the top stone that held an arch
together. For musicians there is both the notion of keys on various instru-
ments as points of initial contact and also the means of unlocking a system
of a series of related tones. The composer Robert Schumann is attributed
as having said:
Music . . . is the spiritual language of emotion, which is hidden more
secretly than the soul . . . just as at the clavier the keys must be touched
before they sound; it is only then that the emotion communicates with
the slumbering realm of tones.
(Alan 1969 and cited by Cobb 1992: 143)
As Clive Robbins pointed out at the BSMT/APMT conference, his name Clive
comes from ‘kleis’ (Greek) and ‘clavis’ (Latin) for key (Robbins 2000). It
was apt that Clive’s work was celebrated at Washington as a major ‘door
opener’ for many music therapists across the world.
1 The extended use of the metaphor of a threshold in this introduction has been developed
from Leslie Bunt’s unpublished keynote address to the BSMT/APMT Annual Conference,
February 2000.

4
The handbook of music therapy
There are many ancient triumphal entrances and gateways still to be 
seen in Rome. As therapists we may ﬁnd inspiration from them and from
images of gateways that lead to different places. Entrances to Egyptian tombs
can lead to dark subterranean depths; richly decorated doors can open to
hidden treasures within or represent access to other worlds as in Ghiberti’s
Gate of Paradise to the Baptistery in Florence. Let us consider a doorway
that is open and inviting and another that is ﬁrmly shut. For the ﬁrst, the
entry is potentially celebratory and enlivening – a musical corollary could
be Mussorgsky’s Great Gate of Kiev: for the second, there might be a risk
in stepping through; determination or force may be required.
How do we feel, for example, as we witness Tamino being initially refused
entrance through the doorways to Sarastro’s temple in Mozart’s The Magic
Flute? What do we feel as we contemplate the entrances in the drawings 
by Jonathan Barnes (see Plates 1 and 2)? A different kind of contemporary
artistic version of moving through gateways into different virtual worlds of
gardens, houses and seascapes with many transformations en route is Peter
Gabriel’s computer game Eve (Gabriel 1996). Within the Maori tradition the
gateway to the meeting area known as the ‘marae’ is an assembly point for
visitors. It is a threshold representing the relationship between the hosts and
their visitors. Such a potent image emphasises the collective and social
aspects of a threshold in addition to any individual journey.
Another pioneer who literally opened many doors for music therapy and
music therapists in the UK was Juliette Alvin. The following is typical of
her many anecdotes. One day she approached the entrance of a large 
womens’ prison, cello in hand (see Plate 3). She was greeted at what seemed
to be a formidable entrance by one of the ofﬁcers. ‘I’ve come to play my
cello to the women’ was her clear announcement resulting in nothing or nobody
standing in her way. She crossed this threshold, normally locked and
inhibiting movement in either direction, with a determination to offer the
inmates a new experience that in turn would enable them to move, albeit
temporarily, across a further threshold, namely into a musical space.
We shall be celebrating the work of other music therapy ‘door-openers’
throughout this text. The voices of Jean Eisler, Helen Odell-Miller, Elaine
Streeter and Tony Wigram (past students of either Alvin or Nordoff and
Robbins and teachers of a new generation of therapists) are heard ﬁrst in
Chapter 3 and then as recurring traces throughout.
Chapter 3 is a bridge between the opening background chapters and the
clinical section of the book. This second section includes contributions from
colleagues working in the areas of autism, adult learning disability, neuro-
logy, forensic psychiatry and dementia. We hope to involve you in these 
case stories and, through doing so, reveal something of the process of music
therapy. Some relevant theory in the ﬁeld and in other professions with which
music therapy is closely associated is identiﬁed and explained. We aim to
show how this theoretical knowledge informs and underpins practice. The

Introduction
5
theoretical exploration does not attempt to be comprehensive: the handbook
is rooted in practice.
This emphasis on practice is central to the third part of the book describ-
ing resources for training. It begins with a chapter by Sarah Hoskyns stress-
ing the fundamental aspects of observation and listening (Chapter 10) with
the following two chapters charting some of the personal and musical
resources needed for a clinical journey at its various stages (Chapter 12 
co-authored with Julian Raphael). In the ﬁnal section the emerging music
therapist crosses a further threshold and steps out into the profession itself.
Here issues relating to assessment, supervision and continued personal and
musical growth are explored (Chapter 13). Leslie Bunt includes some
reﬂections on research in Chapter 14 followed by his chapter on processes
of transformation in Guided Imagery and Music. We round off the hand-
book with some ﬁnal thoughts on a range of topical themes.
Plate 2 Entrance to tomb at Muglish, Kazanluk, Cyprus (Jonathan Barnes)

6
The handbook of music therapy
It will be noticeable that there is a concentration on British music ther-
apy practice and literature. We have planned the book as an overview of
music therapy in the UK as the profession moves across a very important
threshold, namely the start of a new century. For all of us in this profession
a rich challenge is offered to step over and forge new pathways. We hope
that the contents will be of use to experienced practitioners and teachers of
music therapy and other clinical ﬁelds, to those entering the profession and
to those interested in inquiring or making further study into the discipline.
The music therapist is one of the keepers of the gate, one of the techni-
cians of the sacred, one who sees the vision and hears the song of the
one and the many, the one who dances on the edge of time, one who can
guard the threshold of being, one who waits for sound . . . [our italics]
(Kenny 1989: Preface)
Plate 3 HM Prison, Holloway, London (Jonathan Barnes)

Part I
Background and context

This page intentionally left blank

Chapter 1
Setting the scene
Leslie Bunt and Sarah Hoskyns
INTRODUCTION
The subject of music therapy is creeping gradually into the awareness of the
general public. There is growing media interest with articles about music ther-
apy appearing regularly in the press and music therapists being featured on
television and radio. Another burgeoning sign of this public recognition is
when the character of a music therapist enters a piece of contemporary ﬁction.
In Helen Dunmore’s novel Talking to the Dead the photographer heroine
prepares for a project with children in Romania where she will be joining
not just one but two music therapists (Dunmore 1997: 60–61). A further sign
is the increasing interest among young people in training for music ther-
apy. The following appeared in a British national newspaper about pupils
attending a specialist music school: ‘70 per cent of Chetham’s pupils go on
to music college and 30 per cent to university, usually to read music. About
a third overall end up earning their living as musicians, as teachers, performers
or music therapists’ (The Independent 11 January 1996).
We often hear comments from teachers at music colleges and university
music departments about the growing interest in music therapy as a serious
career option for students. The administrator of the British Society for
Music Therapy (BSMT), the general body open to all interested in the sub-
ject, reports an average of over 2000 enquiries per year. A visit to her ofﬁce
is now included as part of a London taxi driver’s training, described collo-
quially as ‘the knowledge’ (Christophers 2001). Electronic access to web-
sites has reduced the number of personal enquiries to the BSMT ofﬁce, as
is the case with the professional body, the Association of Professional 
Music Therapists (APMT). Nevertheless the administrator of the APMT still
reports an average of 20 career enquiries per week and these requests are
from people of all ages (Asbridge 2001). Regional representatives of the APMT
are also local sources of information about music therapy.
We can say conﬁdently that music therapy developed dramatically dur-
ing the last two decades of the previous century into a mature and respected
profession. It has truly come of age. This development was highlighted in

10
Part I Background and context
the UK in 1997 by the state registration of music therapy as a profession
supplementary to medicine. Such a signiﬁcant step forward is due to the 
dedication and strength of purpose of many talented practitioners and to
the support of clinical allies and forward-thinking managers. This increased
recognition has spurred the creation of more music therapy positions in both
the public and private sectors. These are important steps forward but vigi-
lance is required to maintain the balance between the numbers of students
we train, any development of new courses and the availability and creation
of positions. A further sign of maturity is the recognition by practitioners
of the importance of regular supervision, matched by a growing number of
experienced supervisors. Additionally, a steady output of research is indic-
ating evidence of effective practice in many clinical areas.
It is within this context of an exciting period in the profession’s history
that we embark on this scene-setting chapter. Within the chapter we will:
•
provide a background to the current status and deﬁnition of music 
therapy;
•
indicate the range of settings where qualiﬁed music therapists work;
•
survey some recent, and for the most part, British publications;
•
explore some of the qualities needed both to train and practise as a music
therapist.
CURRENT MUSIC THERAPY PRACTICE
Definition
In the most recent careers information leaﬂet published by the APMT music
therapy is described as follows:
Music therapy provides a framework in which a mutual relationship is
set up between client and therapist. The growing relationship enables
changes to occur, both in the condition of the client and in the form
that the therapy takes. . . . By using music creatively in a clinical setting,
the therapist seeks to establish an interaction, a shared musical experi-
ence leading to the pursuit of therapeutic goals. These goals are deter-
mined by the therapist’s understanding of the client’s pathology and
personal needs.
(APMT 2000a)
We quote this deﬁnition as it is the one most commonly cited by members
of the professional association and one with which members working within
many different perspectives seem to be comfortable. A further deﬁnition 
is: ‘Music therapy is the use of sounds and music within an evolving 

Setting the scene
11
relationship between client/patient and therapist to support and develop 
physical, mental, social, emotional and spiritual well-being’ (adapted from
Bunt 1994: 8).
Legal background
Since 1976 the APMT has been responsible for monitoring the evolution 
of the profession. It played a key role in developing professional standards
and overseeing a basic level of training. It linked with government depart-
ments in the establishment in 1982 of the profession’s Career and Grading
Structure within the Whitley Council of the Department of Health (see his-
torical summary in Bunt 1994). During 1997 art, music and drama thera-
pies were granted by Act of Parliament the right to become state registered.
This involved the creation of an Arts Therapists Board under the Profes-
sions Supplementary to Medicine Act 1960, extending the original 1960 Act
to include the arts therapists alongside other professionals such as occupa-
tional therapists and physiotherapists. In a statement to the House of Lords
accompanying the Draft Order of 6 March 1997, Baroness Cumberlege out-
lined the function of the Arts Therapists Board: ‘to promote high standards
of professional education and conduct within the umbrella of the Council
for Professions Supplementary to Medicine (CPSM).’ The main duties of the
Board are:
. . . to prepare and maintain a register; approve training courses leading
to state registration and the institutions providing them; determine
applications for admission to the register on the basis of qualiﬁcations
and experience acquired either in the UK or elsewhere; and to set up
the investigation and disciplinary committees to produce guidance on
conduct and deal with individual cases of misconduct.
(Hansard 6 March 1997: 2026–2029)
Cumberlege’s statement continued with the important notice that practitioners
who are registered in this way by the Board will be able to call themselves
‘state registered arts therapists’ and that ‘The use of that title by a person
who is not registered will be an offence’ (ibid.). Clearly these moves have
important implications for the provision of a protected professional service
to patients and for the stature and respect of the arts therapies professions
(for further details of the stages involved in gaining state registration see
Barham 1999).1 Members of the British Medical Association wrote a letter
to the CPSM in support of the applications for state registration from both
the APMT and the British Association of Art Therapists. They stated:
1 The Health Professions Council took over from the CPSM as the new legislative body for
State Registration of Arts Therapists in 2002.

12
Part I Background and context
Both organisations appear to fulﬁl the criteria necessary for state registra-
tion. They both have a code of conduct and a central register, set national
professional standards for practice and training and can cite substantial
research demonstrating the value of their respective therapies. Consider-
ing the development they have made over recent years, their relationships
with other professionals and their emphasis on their role as members of
an inter-disciplinary team, it would seem appropriate for art and music
therapists to achieve state registration to protect their status and to bring
them in line with colleagues in occupational therapy, speech therapy etc.
(British Medical Association 1991)
Postgraduate training in music therapy
There are currently seven postgraduate training courses in music therapy in
the UK (see Appendix 1). The oldest course began in 1968 when Juliette Alvin
was invited to introduce music therapy into the Guildhall School of Music
and Drama in London. In 1974 Paul Nordoff and Clive Robbins began teach-
ing at Goldie Leigh Hospital in South London. The training course bearing
their names is now based at the Nordoff–Robbins Centre in North London.
In 1980 a new course was established at Southlands College, Roehampton
Institute. A two-year part-time training course was set up at Bristol Uni-
versity in 1991 and the fourth full-time course began at Anglia Polytechnic
University, Cambridge in 1994. The most recent courses have been the ﬁrst
course in Wales at the Royal Welsh College of Music and Drama (1997) 
and in Scotland a new Nordoff-Robbins programme at the University of
Edinburgh (2002). Successful  students  can  leave  the  training  courses with
 a Postgraduate Diploma in Music  Therapy.  Several  courses  also  offer
additional study at Master’s level with the other courses moving in that direc-
tion. During 2000/2001, all the courses went through a process of review and
appraisal in order that they could satisfy requirements for approval by the
Arts Therapists Board of the CPSM. State registration is only possible for
students who have completed successfully one of the approved courses.
A newly qualiﬁed therapist can join the APMT as a provisional member
and, after a minimum of 32 hours of supervision with an approved super-
visor based on 320 hours of clinical contact time, can then apply for full 
membership. The APMT also has categories for student and associate 
membership (retired members or those living abroad).
The range of the work and settings
Music therapists work both with individuals and in small groups. Most 
therapists are mainly full- or part-time clinical practitioners with a growing
number engaged in management, training and research. The majority of 

Setting the scene
13
therapists work within the statutory agencies of the National Health Service
(NHS), Local Education Authorities (LEAs) or Social Services. The Whitley
Council’s Career and Grading Structure is still used for therapists being
employed within the NHS. Employment in schools and decisions about salary
structures are often at the discretion of headteachers and school governors.
Historically qualiﬁed teacher status has been a pertinent issue. Many ther-
apists in schools have tended to obtain a teacher qualiﬁcation in order to
gain longer hours of employment and for their work to be valued ﬁnancially
at the appropriate level. However, increasingly therapists have argued for 
an equivalent level without necessarily having qualiﬁed teacher status. Other
therapists are self-employed and some work privately or for charities.
There is a wide range of settings including: pre-school specialist nurseries
and centres for children; special schools for children with learning difﬁ-
culties; mainstream schools; hospitals and centres for adults with learning
difﬁculties, physical disabilities, mental health and neurological problems; nurs-
ing homes; centres for children and adults with visual or hearing impairments;
hospices and centres for people of all ages living with terminal illness and
the prison service. More recent developments include work in designated music
therapy or arts therapies community-based centres and local health centres
run by groups of general practitioners.
At the end of 2000 there was a total of 490 practising members of the APMT
with 402 female members (82 per cent) and 88 male (18 per cent). It is note-
worthy that a 1999 survey, reported by Michel (2000), indicated a similar
balance of the sexes in the USA. These 490 British members worked across
the entire age range (see Tables 1.1 and 1.2). As can be seen in Table 1.1 the
numbers working within each subgroup indicate that many therapists work
within a variety of areas.
As in earlier APMT surveys work with children and adults with learn-
ing difﬁculties and adults with mental health problems still predominate (for
example see Bunt 1994: 10). In Part II of this book we include examples 
of work across the life span and with people with wide-ranging needs. We
cannot give justice to the full range of work and have needed to be select-
ive. Additional case material will be included elsewhere in the book and where
we perceive gaps we will direct the reader to the appropriate literature. Here
follow summaries of the main areas of work.
Music therapy with children
In 1979 Elaine Streeter completed the ﬁrst Master’s thesis in music therapy
in the UK. She explored the connections between rhythmic processes in work
with children, particularly those with communication problems, and early
patterns in mother–child interaction (Streeter 1979). As we shall see in the
clinical chapters these connections became a critical base for much music ther-
apy practice with children. It provided a developmental perspective to the

14
Part I Background and context
work. In 1981 Streeter went on to write a book that provided many practi-
cal examples of musical ideas for parents to explore with their children (see
Streeter 2001, her latest edition). Parents could easily recognise how musi-
cal interaction might aid their child’s development of speech and language,
physical skills, play, social and emotional maturation. The activities under-
lined the therapeutic emphasis of working at the child’s pace, waiting for the
child, care for timing and pacing, use of silence, turn-taking, vocal play and
exploration of signiﬁcant objects (in our case the musical instruments).
The consultant paediatrician with whom Streeter worked, the late Dr Hugh
Jolly, would often say that he could gain a fuller picture of each child’s level
Table 1.1 Areas of work and ranked numbers of therapists
Area of work
No.
Adult
210
Learning difﬁculties
157
Mental health problems
128
Emotional and behavioural difﬁculties
119
‘Challenging’ behaviour
114
Elderly
51
Neurology
37
Forensic psychiatry
25
‘Normal’ neurotic
23
Stress management
12
Addiction
11
Prison service
1
HIV/AIDS
1
Children
Pre-school
138
Learning difﬁculties
119
Emotional and behavioural difﬁculties
99
‘Challenging’ behaviour
86
Epilepsy
60
Primary
191
Learning difﬁculties
160
Emotional and behavioural difﬁculties
134
‘Challenging’ behaviour
120
Epilepsy
74
Secondary
150
Learning difﬁculties
130
Emotional and behavioural difﬁculties
109
‘Challenging’ behaviour
98
Epilepsy
64
Adolescent (outside of school system)
51
Source: Association of Professional Music Therapists Survey of Membership, 2000.

Setting the scene
15
of development, play and potential by observing them in music therapy. 
Dr Jolly stated in a BBC television documentary that any assessment of a
pre-school child was incomplete without a contribution from a music ther-
apist (Wigram 1995: 184). He would often comment that in music therapy
a child with communication problems could have inﬂuence over an adult and
communicate intentions in a way not possible in any other medium. Where
else could a child organise an adult in such a way?
Another leading paediatrician, the late Dr Derek Ricks, encouraged Tony
Wigram to develop music therapy assessment procedures in his work for
Harper House Children’s Service, the national assessment centre for children
with autism and communication problems based in Hertfordshire (Wigram
1995, 1999a). The late Professor David Baum, Director of the Institute of
Child Health in Bristol, Trustee of The MusicSpace Trust and one-time
President of the College of Paediatricians considered that:
By the Institute of Child Health working in conjunction with Music-
Space we hope to bring music as a serious therapeutic tool into the 
medical community. I believe that all people would feel music is good
in a broad sense. We would like to be associated with work which shows
it is good in a speciﬁc sense and is not something ‘fringey and out there’
but is something which should be prescribable and used as a serious ther-
apeutic tool in serious clinical work.
(Presentation video for The MusicSpace Trust 1991)
Table 1.2 Combined areas of interest and ranked numbers of therapists
Area
No.
Adult/child
Learning difﬁculties
255
Autism
246
Communication disorders
203
Emotional and behavioural difﬁculties
201
‘Challenging’ behaviour
181
Mental health problems
128
Epilepsy
103
Sexual abuse
65
Eating disorders
28
Hospice
23
Student training
Placements and/or teaching
116
Personal therapy for students
13
Source: Association of Professional Music Therapists Survey of Membership, 2000.

16
Part I Background and context
The speciﬁc approach instigated by Paul Nordoff and Clive Robbins has done
a great deal to document and publicise the efﬁcacy of music therapy with
children (Nordoff and Robbins 1971, 1977). Many parents and members of
the general public have come to know about music therapy through this work.
The Nordoff–Robbins approach has been particularly successful in address-
ing the needs of severely disturbed autistic and psychotic children. It is equally
effective with children with major physical disabilities and learning difﬁ-
culties. More recently the London Centre has developed work with older 
children with differing problems including eating disorders (Robarts and
Sloboda 1994). Sandra Brown, who teaches at the Nordoff–Robbins Centre
and is now training as a Jungian analyst, describes the music therapy pro-
cess of a young autistic child in Chapter 5.
Specialist work with children has also developed in three further areas:
(a) Cathy Ibberson, a clinician with dual training in paediatric nursing 
and music therapy, is one of a group of therapists who has developed
work in children’s hospices (Ibberson 1996). The proliferation of music
therapy within the hospices has been aided by ﬁnancial support from
Jessie’s Fund, a registered charity set up in memory of nine-year old Jessie
by her parents who are themselves both professional musicians. The char-
ity also funds short courses and workshops for hospice workers to
encourage more use of music in hospices.
(b) Penny Rogers, an experienced therapist, researcher and service manager,
has developed research and clinical approaches in music therapy with
abused children. She has presented and published widely about this work
(for example Rogers 1992, 1993) and has recently been appointed as a
clinical specialist in child protection, advising authorities and the courts
about the treatment of children suffering abuse.
(c) Joy Hasler organised a successful conference on music therapy with fam-
ilies in June 2000, drawing together the research work of Alison Levinge
(1999) and Amelia Oldﬁeld (Oldﬁeld et al. 2001) with clinical practitioners
around the UK. In Auriel Warwick’s review of music therapy in the edu-
cation system she refers to the results of her collaborative research pro-
ject with her psychologist colleague, Pierette Muller, into music therapy
with autistic children and their families (Warwick 1995). Further discussion
of work with children and their mothers is included in Chapter 4 (and
see Eleanor Tingle’s research involving teachers and other carers in the
analysis of ‘moments of contact’ with children with severe learning dis-
abilities – Tingle 2000).
Some music therapists practise in schools. There has been extensive work
convincing LEAs of the value of music therapy for children and young 
people within the special school system and more recently in mainstream 
settings, particularly in the area of crisis intervention. In some authorities

Setting the scene
17
music therapy has become part of a child’s Statement of Special Educational
Needs. It can be seen to help a child access the curriculum, for example lis-
tening skills, attention, motivation, classroom management with children
exhibiting particular behavioural problems. Some of the general aims of music
therapy are similar to the aims of the Personal and Social Development in
the 5–14 curriculum. The recently developed ‘Passport’ framework states 
that ‘the personal development of pupils, spiritually, morally, socially and
culturally, plays a signiﬁcant part in their ability to learn and achieve’ (Lees
and Plant 2000: 26).
Several authorities in the UK employ music therapists as contracted clin-
icians, as part of the LEA’s music service or as freelance sessional therapists.
Examples are Oxfordshire and Birmingham, where Auriel Warwick and Angela
Fenwick respectively pioneered services in the early 1970s, and more
recently Bedfordshire, Cambridgeshire, Leicestershire and Worcestershire.
LEAs also contract through charities such as The MusicSpace Trust. The
settings where children are seen for therapy vary from dedicated spaces in
music therapy centres to shared spaces in pre-school nurseries and rooms 
of varying quality in schools. The provision of suitable space for therapy is
usually improved when there is a clear explanation about the work and close
liaison between the visiting music therapist and other staff in these settings
(see also Chapters 2 and 13).
Music therapy with adults
Historically music therapy has had a substantial role in the care of adults
with learning disabilities.2 This long tradition began in the large institutions
in the 1950s with the late Priscilla Barclay setting up the ﬁrst music therapy
service at St. Lawrence’s Hospital in Surrey. This work set the scene for the
replication of other departments nationwide. The British government’s
much criticised ‘Care in the Community’ policy has caused many changes
in the service. As previous hospital residents have been discharged and
rehoused in community homes, music therapists have developed a peripatetic
and somewhat diffuse service. While in theory these changes are positive 
steps forward music therapists are keenly aware of the potential danger of
isolation; the break-up of close multidisciplinary teams; the dilution of the
provision and resources and a dispersal of energy. Residents who have been
accustomed to living within the protection of an institution, where a variety
of services were on hand, have experienced radical change. Some NHS Trusts
have managed this transition well, others not. Nevertheless the process of
change has also allowed for the development of alternative community
2 We are aware of political and cultural trends in the use of terminology relating to learning
disability. We have kept to this term for the most part throughout the text but it could be used
interchangeably with ‘mental handicap’ or the more commonly found ‘learning difﬁculty’.

18
Part I Background and context
models of music therapy provision such as the setting-up of local arts ther-
apies resource centres and new charitable trusts.
One signiﬁcant development in working with adults with learning disabilities
has been the furthering of our understanding of the psychological and emo-
tional needs of this group. Several music therapists have been greatly
inspired by the research that emerged from London’s Tavistock Clinic, for
example the work of Jon Stokes (1987) and Valerie Sinason. In her seminal
text Mental Handicap and the Human Condition Sinason describes how 
people with learning disabilities can be powerfully affected by what she terms
a ‘secondary handicap’. She indicates how an individual may make use 
of the primary damage in a defensive or abusive way (Sinason 1992). Kay
Sobey and other music therapists trained at the Roehampton Institute have
published case material that links music therapy practice to this notion of
‘secondary handicap’ (see also Clough 1992; Heal 1989; Ritchie 1991; Sobey
1993; Toolan and Coleman 1995). In Chapter 6, Tessa Watson discusses music
therapy within this frame of reference and there are further references to
Sinason’s work in Chapters 5 and 7.
As can be seen from Table 1.1, adult mental health is the second largest
category of employment for music therapists working in the adult ﬁeld. The
pioneering work of, among others, Mary Priestley and her colleagues at the
St. Bernard’s Wing of Ealing Hospital and Helen Odell-Miller at Fulbourn
Hospital, Cambridge has done much to create acceptance and respect for
music therapy in NHS mental health teams. The Psychiatric Interest Group
of the APMT was formed in the early 1980s and this body of therapists worked
hard to debate issues, to disseminate information, promote research and to
base music therapy on ﬁrm foundations within adult psychiatry.
We include two chapters from psychiatry in this handbook. In Chapter 8
Ann Sloboda and Richard Bolton discuss casework in the ﬁeld of forensic
psychiatry. In Chapter 9 Helen Odell-Miller reviews music therapy work with
patients diagnosed with dementia. Further examples of music therapy in psy-
chiatry can be found in compilation texts edited by Aldridge (2000), Bruscia
(1991), Wigram et al. (1995) and Wigram and De Backer (1999b). A num-
ber of journal articles and conference papers also present work in this area
(for example Davies 1996; Odell-Miller 1999). For many years Priestley’s 1975
classic text on music therapy in psychiatry Music Therapy in Action had been
difﬁcult to obtain. A great gift to British music therapy has been the publi-
cation by Barcelona Publications (under the care of Bruscia) of her Essays
in Analytical Music Therapy. Four of the chapters come from the earlier book
with the remainder resulting from Priestley’s other writings in journals and
from her teachings in Germany (Priestley 1994). She deﬁnes and gives many
clinical examples of techniques to probe the conscious and access the uncon-
scious. She introduces some of the basic concepts of Freud and Klein and
identiﬁes levels of resistance, various defence mechanisms and manifestations
of the Jungian concept of the shadow as encountered in her work.

Setting the scene
19
A growing interest in linking music therapy in psychiatry to theories
derived from group psychotherapy and group analysis developed during the
late 1980s and 1990s. John Woodcock’s article in the revised British Journal
of Music Therapy in 1987 set the trend (Woodcock 1987). This was fol-
lowed by stimulating discussion of the effective use of group music therapy
linking improvisation with verbal reﬂection at conferences and then by such
writers as Davies and Richards (1998), Stewart (1996), Towse and Flower
(1993) and Towse (1997). This seems an important step in theory-building
in this ﬁeld as group work has held such a strong position in mental health
treatment in other clinical professions. At the time of writing, Alison Davies
and Eleanor Richards were preparing a book on music therapy group work
for Jessica Kingsley Publishers. We refer readers interested in group work
to this forthcoming text, particularly as there is a major emphasis on indi-
vidual work in the clinical sections of this text (Davies and Richards 2002).
We conclude this section on the range of clinical practice with passing 
reference to more recent areas of work with adults. In Chapter 7 Cathy Durham
reviews and describes examples of work with adults with neurological illness
or injury. Work within this ﬁeld was the subject of Wendy Magee’s doctoral
research (summarised in Magee 1999). Although the numbers are still few
(see Table 1.1) some therapists in the UK have developed specialist interest
in new clinical areas, additionally often setting up conferences and publish-
ing their work. Areas include:
•
anorexia nervosa (Robarts and Sloboda 1994);
•
cancer (Bunt et al. 2000);
•
HIV/AIDS (Lee 1996);
•
music therapy students (see Postscript to Part III);
•
offenders (Hoskyns 1995);
•
palliative care (Lee 1995a and see Aldridge 1999);
•
stress management (Holland 1995);
•
respiratory and other physiological problems ameliorated by vibro-
acoustic therapy (Skille and Wigram 1995; Wigram and Dileo 1997).
While active work using improvisation is still central to music therapy prac-
tice in the UK listening to music and other receptive techniques are gaining
ground (see ﬁnal section of Chapter 12). Helen Bonny’s Guided Imagery and
Music (GIM) is attracting interest among some music therapists in the UK
and some GIM case material is included in Chapter 15.
A SURVEY OF SOME RECENT LITERATURE
As can be noted in the previous section the number of music therapy texts
has proliferated since the mid-1990s. Some are compilation texts that have

20
Part I Background and context
been edited after presentation in previous formats such as music therapy con-
ferences and symposia (for example Wigram et al. 1995; Wigram and de Backer
1999a, 1999b); some are collections of case material from different sources
or authors (for example Ansdell 1995; Pavlicevic 1999a). The emphasis on
the individual and group case study in many of these texts builds on the work
of earlier authors. A landmark publication was Bruscia’s compilation of 
40 case studies from therapists across nine countries (Bruscia 1991).
Several music therapists have contributed chapters on music therapy 
to other specialist texts. Robarts contributed to a text on autism with a 
comprehensive literature review and detailed case study of an autistic boy
(Robarts 1996). Sloboda has written a chapter on music therapy in relation
to psychotic violence (Sloboda 1996), Loth on music therapy in forensic 
psychotherapy (Loth 1996) and Hughes, Robarts, Rogers and Sloboda have
contributed to a book on arts therapies with eating disorders (Dokter 1995).
Odell-Miller has written a chapter for a book entitled Continuing Care for
Older People (Odell-Miller 1997) and Sobey and Woodcock contributed a
chapter to Process in the Arts Therapies, outlining the speciﬁc psychodynamic
orientation to the music therapy training at the Roehampton Institute
(Sobey and Woodcock 1999). Interest in music therapy practice is not only
growing within other clinical ﬁelds as demonstrated here but also from within
writing on music itself. Bunt contributed an overview of the clinical and 
therapeutic uses of music in The Social Psychology of Music (Bunt in
Hargreaves and North 1997). He wrote the entries on music therapy in the
latest edition of The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians (2001)
and The Oxford Companion to Music (2002). He recently collaborated with
Pavlicevic on a music therapy chapter in a major text on Emotion and Music
edited by Juslin and Sloboda (2001).
Chapters and articles on music therapy have also recently appeared in 
texts of a more historical, cultural and philosophical nature. A symposium
organised by Horden resulted in the publication of Music as Medicine: The
History of Music Therapy since Antiquity (Horden 2000). Tyler contributed
a chapter to this compilation outlining early recreational approaches of music
in hospitals and the gradual emergence of music therapy as a discipline 
and profession (Tyler 2000). A second symposium with an anthropological
perspective was organised by Gouk resulting in the publication of Music,
Healing and Culture: Towards a Comparative Perspective (Gouk 2000). The
music educator Boyce-Tillman has also drawn on historical and anthropo-
logical sources in her recent exploration of healing practices and musical tra-
ditions within different societies in her book Constructing Musical Healing:
The Wounds that Sing (Boyce-Tillman 2000). The growing importance given
to more philosophical aspects of the work was also apparent at the Fifth
European Music Therapy Congress held in Naples in 2001. One of the sub-
keynote speakers focused on the aesthetic dimensions of music therapy
(Frohne-Hagemann 2001).

Setting the scene
21
The rest of this section on the recent literature is based on a topical issue
of debate. As in the other creative arts therapies one of the recurring themes
within the profession is how the art – in our case, the music – is construed
in relation to the therapist’s clinical orientation. In the Introduction to The
Handbook of Art Therapy we read: ‘The theoretical approach of arts thera-
pists is shaped by how “art” and its use in therapy is understood and the
orientation of the therapist in coming to this understanding’ (Case and Dalley
1992: 2). The recent proliferation of music therapy texts has highlighted an
interesting continuum between therapists who underpin their practice with
reference to clinical theories from psychology, medicine and, in particular,
psychoanalysis and those who are sceptical of theories that are not rooted
in or evolve from the music itself. Of course this is not a totally polarised
issue and some of the writers we will be highlighting indicate an intention
to work in an integrative manner.
In 1995 the art therapist Gilroy and music therapist Lee edited Art and
Music: Therapy and Research. The text includes descriptions of the research
process, clinically worked material and personal narratives (Gilroy and Lee
1995). This shifting continuum between the emphasis on the music and ref-
erence to other clinical theories can be seen in the two contributions by music
therapists in the section ‘The Practice of Research.’ Lee’s chapter builds from
his doctoral work with a focus on a detailed structural analysis of indi-
vidual improvisations with people living with HIV and AIDS in order to gain
further understanding into the music therapy process (Lee 1995b and see Lee
1989, 1990). In the second music therapy chapter Pavlicevic, again building
from her doctoral work, discusses music and emotion and outlines her con-
cept of ‘dynamic form’ in music therapy (see Chapter 4 of this handbook)
and some models for understanding the meaning of musical action in ther-
apy. She recommends that music therapists build bridges with practitioners
in allied ﬁelds, citing literature in the related ﬁelds of psychology, psycho-
therapy, neurology, musical analysis and musical aesthetics (Pavlicevic
1995a). The debate has been set into motion.
Both Lee and Pavlicevic went on write their own books and these texts
take the debate further. Lee’s Music at the Edge is a complete case study of
the music therapy experiences of Francis, a musician living with AIDS (Lee
1996). The music is at the centre of this text with examples of Francis’ music
transcribed and analysed in the text and recordings of some of his own and
joint improvisations with Lee available on the accompanying CD. In the
keynote address of the musicology section of the Naples congress Ansdell
referred to Lee’s work as being ‘at the forefront of this . . . musicological 
perspective in music therapy research’ (Ansdell 2001: 23). Lee also includes
transcribed verbal reﬂections from both Francis and other listeners on the
musical material presented in his book. The juxtaposition of musical and 
verbal commentary creates many challenges and what Ansdell describes as
‘the “gap” between musicologically analysed “musical content” and personal

22
Part I Background and context
(therapeutic) signiﬁcance – the attempted link, that is, between the structural
and hermeneutic dimensions of the phenomenon’ (ibid.: 23).
Like Lee, Pavlicevic trained in the Nordoff–Robbins approach. Her 
book Music Therapy in Context: Music, Meaning and Relationship develops
material from her earlier chapter, drawing numerous strands together from
a variety of areas including: music theory, music psychology, cross-cultural
debates, non-verbal communication particularly early mother–child inter-
action and psychodynamic theory. It is also a personal story with references
to her clinical work in more than one country, discussions with colleagues,
processes in improvisation, life experiences and another ongoing debate, namely
between the position of the music and words in music therapy (Pavlicevic
1997). Her text develops theoretical concepts to a more sophisticated level
than has previously been attempted in British writing. For example, many
music therapists have been enlightened by the theoretical connections
between musical process and the observations and theories of Stern and
Winnicott but what Pavlicevic achieves here is an effective synthesis and 
explanation of these different approaches and disciplines. Perhaps this text
reﬂects an evolutionary stage for music therapy, the amassing of clinical mate-
rial over the past 30 years now allowing for more concentration on effective
discussion of theory.
A central theme of Ansdell’s Music for Life: Aspects of Creative Music
Therapy with Adult Clients is that music therapy ‘works in the way music itself
works’ (Ansdell 1995: 5). Like Lee and Pavlicevic, Ansdell has extended the
principles of the Nordoff–Robbins approach to include work with adults (such
development builds on, among others, Julienne Cartwright’s earlier work in
the early 1980s, particularly her work in Scotland). Ansdell’s book weaves
case studies, for the most part of his own and colleagues’ work both in the
UK and Germany, with themes that emerge from the studies.
These short essays concern aspects of the process of Creative Music
Therapy such as creating, listening, expressing and meeting in the
music: also how the phenomenon of music works in itself within music
therapy to quicken people into action, connect them into a group or recall
them into integration
(Ansdell 1995: x)
We can note here that a later text by Pavlicevic – Music Therapy: Intimate
Notes – follows Ansdell’s model of weaving the writer’s reﬂective comments
between a range of case material, in this case the result of interviews with
colleagues working within different specialist areas (Pavlicevic 1999a).
Ansdell’s 1995 text is also published with an accompanying CD enabling
listeners to understand more of the actual process of Creative Music Ther-
apy. In his doctoral and post-doctoral research Ansdell has continued to relate
aspects of the ‘new musicology’ to music therapy (Ansdell 1997, 1999a, 2001).

Setting the scene
23
For example, he is one of a group of researchers who have introduced music
therapists to Small’s idea of ‘musicking’.
To music is to take part, in any capacity, in a musical performance,
whether by performing, by listening, by rehearsing or practising, by pro-
viding material for performance . . . The act of musicking establishes in
the place where it is happening a set of relationships, and it is in those
relationships that the meaning of the act lies.
(Small 1998: 9, 13)
Small sees such relationships as not only existing between the sounds them-
selves but also metaphorically between the various personal relationships and
connections with the outside world. In his Naples keynote speech Ansdell
also placed his own work within the context of music’s expression of indi-
vidual and cultural identities. He referred to Ruud’s recent writing, in par-
ticular Music Therapy: Improvisation, Communication and Culture (Ruud 1998).
Ruud has also greatly inﬂuenced his countryman Stige in his search for ‘a
better understanding of how the participants create meaning in the com-
municative processes in the different contexts of music therapy’ (Stige 1998:
26 and see his 2001 sub-keynote to the Naples congress when he described
an ethnographic approach to clinical research).
The experience of observing a young disabled woman in an individual music
therapy session gave the researcher Aldridge ‘the impetus to the rest of my
professional working life’ (Aldridge 1996: 2). In his position as Professor for
Clinical Research Methods in the Music Therapy Institute at the University
of Witten Herdecke, Germany, Aldridge has been a major inﬂuence in the
development of music therapy research. In the ﬁrst of a series of three texts
Music Therapy Research and Practice in Medicine: From Out of the Silence
he brings his research background to a detailed examination of various research
methodologies as they relate to music therapy. He calls for a tolerant
approach. At the Institute in Herdecke music therapy is viewed as comple-
mentary to medical intervention. The work is rooted in both the tradition
of the Nordoff–Robbins approach with its emphasis on clinical improvisa-
tion, and the anthroposophical writings of Rudolf Steiner. Aldridge places
the needs of each patient not only within the perspective of the hospital set-
ting but also within the wider social context. He recommends that any research
should be rooted in practice and that it should resonate with the sounds 
of the music room and the dialogues connecting patient and therapist.
Aldridge takes a radical stance in basing his view of health on music. In con-
trast to relating music therapy to another treatment model such as psycho-
analysis he considers that a musical improvisation can be read as a direct
expression of the needs of the self.
Some of the chapters in the comprehensive text The Art and Science of
Music Therapy: A Handbook edited by Wigram et al. (1995) continue to explore

24
Part I Background and context
the continuum. One example of the more music-centred approaches is 
the detailed description by Howat of a lengthy period of music therapy with
an autistic girl, the only chapter to include written-out musical examples
(Howat 1995). Towse’s chapter stands out for her emphasis on using
recorded music when working with the elderly. But her chapter balances 
her musical approach with her own psychotherapeutic orientation (Towse
1995). John explores more links between psychoanalytic theory and music
therapy with his references to Klein, Segal, Winnicott and Bion to support
work with psychotic patients (John 1995). In Heal Hughes’ chapter a
Kleinian approach to mother–infant interaction is compared to work with
adults with learning disabilities (Heal Hughes 1995).
To conclude this review, a vigorous restatement of our theme concerning
the spectrum of clinical theory and music-based theory was articulated in
1999 in two successive issues of the British Journal of Music Therapy. In the
ﬁrst issue, Streeter (1999a) published a challenging paper putting forward
the view that ﬁnding a balance between musical thinking and psychological
awareness is essential for understanding the music therapy relationship. 
She took one psychological perspective, namely, how basic psychoanalytic
concepts could enhance our awareness of musical processes and safeguard
therapeutic boundaries. She argued that musical thinking was not robust
enough to underpin all aspects of the therapist–client relationship, making
a detailed critique of some aspects of the more music-based texts described
above. A veritable storm ensued with four therapists replying in the very 
next issue in the section entitled ‘Dialogues’ (Aigen 1999; Ansdell 1999b; 
Brown 1999; Pavlicevic 1999b). All four respondents made their critique of
Streeter’s assertions. What was surprising about this was the passion that
this topic engendered. This theme appears to touch our profession deeply;
it is a dichotomy that challenges every music therapist who cares to think
more than casually about their work. Because of this constant client–
therapist–music triangle we have to work thoroughly to maintain balanced,
questioning, tolerant and open attitudes. The subject will not go away, it 
will not leave us alone. It will continue to surface, need framing and refram-
ing depending on context and the different cultural and political demands.
The topic is too powerful a subject to defy any attempt to squash it. It 
seems highly appropriate that the title of the Tenth World Congress of Music
Therapy held in Oxford in July 2002 included the two words: Dialogue 
and Debate.3
3 As therapists, trainers and researchers we have both been inﬂuenced by varied traditions in
psychology (including early mother–infant research and ethology), psychotherapy, musico-
logy and music therapy. We both believe in the importance of integration and of using 
theory that supports music therapy practice. Our research has also used both quantitative
and qualitative approaches when appropriate. We aim to seek a balance between artistic and
psychological underpinning to our work.

Setting the scene
25
QUALITIES NEEDED TO TRAIN AND PRACTISE AS
A MUSIC THERAPIST
Music therapy training involves developing a wide range of competencies and
qualities. The profession requires trainees to be able to integrate their musi-
cality within a sound therapeutic base and an open awareness of individual
value and belief systems. The process of selection involves assessors making
complex judgements about a person’s ability to communicate, to understand
human patterns of relating, to be open and self-aware. A potential therapist
needs to be ﬂexible and to present a professional attitude. We need to be sure
that a trainee is safe (the security of our patients and clients is paramount),
reliable and able to reﬂect. The start of training is only the beginning of a
lifelong process of change, reﬂection and learning.
Music therapy as a career is increasingly appealing to experienced music
teachers, other health-care professionals who have continued to maintain 
a strong commitment to music, younger students of music, specialists in 
psychology and languages, ‘returning’ mothers and seasoned professional musi-
cians wishing to complement and broaden their work. In the UK a sustained
musical background is a prerequisite before applying to train. This has usu-
ally been three years of undergraduate music studies at a university or con-
servatoire. A comparable level of musicianship needs to be demonstrated if
applicants have followed a different entry route. At present there are no
approved undergraduate training courses in the UK. As trainers we are often
asked, why this emphasis on musical competence? Music therapists often work
at a very simple musical level with people who are unpractised musically per-
haps using only one or two sounds. In answer we could say that inherent in
the musical training process are mirrored some key aspects of the work of
a therapist and the therapeutic process itself, for example:
•
a keen attention to the smallest detail;
•
a highly disciplined approach to work;
•
being able to listen very attentively to oneself, for example an instru-
mentalist’s awareness of tuning and pitch discrepancies;
•
being able to listen to others, for example in chamber music and small
group-playing where there is an absence of a speciﬁc director and an 
intuitive sharing of communications with a subtle blend of leading 
and following;
•
the acute awareness of important musical parameters of timing, phras-
ing, blending and;
•
artistic integration and imaginative risk-taking.
Clearly we are looking for an ability to project any musical utterance in
a convincing way and to understand the basis of music as a feeling experi-
ence. We are also expecting candidates to share a communication with

26
Part I Background and context
musical listeners or partners. These are all features of being an effective musi-
cian but they are also essential in the process of therapy. The therapist needs
to know precisely how and when to ‘speak’; to be rooted in feeling experi-
ence; to relate sensitively and to be acutely aware of the impact on others.
The integration and development of these features are very much the busi-
ness of training music therapists and we will examine these aspects in Part
III in more detail. However, a basic competency in or instinct for each strand
in music is a prerequisite, because often our patients will have no words or
may feel that words fail them.
In addition to the musical issues there are certain essential personal qual-
ities that are required by all the training courses. These include:
•
the ability to empathise with children and adults of all ages with wide-
ranging needs;
•
tolerance, especially concerning sensitive issues of race and sexuality;
•
patience;
•
an open and questioning attitude;
•
gentleness and strength;
•
ﬂexibility and adaptability;
•
a sense of humour;
•
emotional stability.
Many courses in the UK expect applicants to be a minimum age of 25. The
training courses have highly developed and individual ways of assessing 
these personal qualities. One possibility may be to include an intensive and 
private interview with a psychotherapist; another may include small group
improvisation and discussion with a music therapist; a third method may
integrate a personal and musical interview, allowing each area to inform the
other.
SUMMARY
In this opening chapter we have tried to set the scene on contemporary music
therapy in the UK. We have discussed the current range of work, reviewed
some of the most signiﬁcant recent publications and outlined some of the
 the
most  common  terminology  used  in  music  therapy, including  brief 
reference to theory, before moving on to sections dealing in more detail with
clinical work and training.
qualities  necessary  to train  as a therapist. We now need to explore

Chapter 2
Practicalities and basic 
principles of music therapy
Leslie Bunt and Sarah Hoskyns
IN TR O D U C TIO N
Chapter 1
 charted the recent evolution of music therapy to its current sta­
tus as a respected profession in its own right. In this chapter some of the 
practicalities, principles and thinking that underpin music therapy practice 
are discussed. We begin with a graphic representation of some of the main 
themes and ‘players’
 present in any music therapy space (see Figure 2.1).
Both patient(s) and therapist will bring to such a music therapy space their 
unique musical histories, values and life experiences. In every session can be 
observed a triadic relationship between the individual child or adult, the music 
and the therapist with the added dynamics of group work. Patients come to 
therapy with their needs. Therapists respond to these, being vigilant to attend 
to their own concerns outside in supervision or their own therapy. Hence in 
Figure 2.1 only needs for the patient(s) are itemised. Other ‘players’
 in this 
space will be any other people, the instruments, the therapist’s theoretical 
framework and the complex influences of the context and larger cultural,
In the space: 
Instruments 
Equipment 
Carers 
Observers
BOUNDARIES OF PLACE AN D TIM E
Figure 2 .1
 The music therapy space.
Patient(s)
needs
history
values
MUSIC
Therapist
values
theory
history
MUSIC THERAPY RELATIONSHIP
Team
Ethics
Health and safety 
Cultural norms
Influences:

28
Part I Background and context
collective and ethical perspectives. We could also consider the whole frame as
a kind of ‘gestalt’ with a constant ﬂuidity between foreground and background
as the various elements within the space shift and change (Zanchi 2001).
CLINICAL EXAMPLE
Case study 1
Sergio, a six-year-old boy with dyspraxia1 and severe difﬁculties with verbal
communication is referred for music therapy. He attends quite willingly but
for the ﬁrst ﬁve sessions insists by his gestures and vocalisations that he 
collects instruments, stores them in available containers and stacks them on
top of a low cupboard, where he proceeds to crouch with them for the dura-
tion of the sessions. The therapist’s expectations of work are to observe 
the detail and quality of his activity, and to provide any opportunities for 
musical encounter. He reminds her of a hamster marking his territory (and
remembers that in her own childhood she had always wanted one).
On the one hand the therapist follows her music therapy norms and eth-
ical code of practice – the child needs to show freely what are his preoccu-
pations, his capacities and interests for musical play. But the culture of the
school says: ‘Children should not climb on furniture’, and the therapist experi-
ences some tension in justifying the child’s actions, especially when he jumps
suddenly in session four and hits his head while on top of the cupboard. One
of the external inﬂuences of the larger team inﬁltrates the room in the mind
of the therapist. She also questions her ability to engage musically with him and
feels disempowered. (Thus she experiences her own frustrations but also per-
haps the feelings of pain, frustration and incapacity expressed in Sergio’s actions.)
Another apparently unacceptable school behaviour (throwing drumsticks
at the therapist) is translated into a musical catching game towards the 
end of the ﬁfth session. The song-game has quite an aggressive quality and is
characterised by sharply accented rhythms; Sergio ‘ﬁres’ the drumsticks like
arrows and the therapist catches them in an inverted drum as she sings. The
eventual outcome of this process over some weeks is loud, positive and extro-
vert singing by the child into a stick ‘microphone’. Gradually the therapist is
gaining some experience of his musical norms, values and potential energy.
She has waited for him and understood his needs. Within the boundaries of
place and time a musical relationship has begun to be formed and framed.
1 Dyspraxia: the partial loss of ability to plan and execute coordinated movements.

Practicalities and basic principles of music therapy
29
This clinical example is used to illustrate some of the elements in Fig-
ure 2.1 and will inform some discussion later in the chapter. We also refer
the reader to Ruud’s discussion of the Nordoff and Robbins case study of
‘Edward’ in relation to the interaction between knowledge, values, interests
and norms and subsequent action in music therapy (Ruud 1998: 105–108).
Parallels can also be drawn with another triangular interaction between the
three forces involved in any artistic endeavour and described by Rooley as
‘idea, action and fruit’ (Rooley 1990: 39).
The rest of this chapter concentrates on:
•
the music therapy space;
•
the musical instruments;
•
boundaries;
•
the qualities of the therapeutic relationship;
•
some features from psychoanalytic theory;
•
the spectrum of therapeutic frameworks;
•
the essential ‘I’s’ of music therapy practice: imagination, intuition,
improvisation and intellect.
The basic principles discussed in this chapter concentrate on psychological
and therapeutic underpinnings of the work, the ‘therapeutics’. The central
position of music, outlined in the previous chapter, will be clearly reﬂected
in the clinical chapters that form Part II. Reference will be made through-
out that section to research that makes biological connections between early
musical development and music therapy practice (for example the work of
Trevarthen) and to those psychologists who describe human interactions using
musical terminology (for example the work of Stern, summarised recently
in Pavlicevic 1997).
A PRACTICAL WORKING FRAME FOR MUSIC
THERAPY
Each person will use music therapy in a unique way. Many factors con-
tribute to providing a safe and secure space for therapy to take place: the
physical conditions; the quality and range of the instruments; the people 
in the room and above all the evolving relationships between the music 
and the people within that space. There are many links between external 
physical features and internal and symbolic aspects of the process. The 
music therapy frame consequently becomes far more than the sum of its 
parts. Before we discuss some of the complex links between objective and
subjective experience, we need to begin simply by being aware of the 
physical characteristics of a music therapy room that contribute towards 
effective work.

30
Part I Background and context
The physical space
Ideally all settings should be dedicated music therapy spaces: well lit, warm
but airy and with sufﬁcient space to accommodate the participants in the
session, a range of instruments and usually a piano or some form of key-
board. Sound-prooﬁng needs careful attention to safeguard both the qual-
ity of the acoustic within the setting and any sound disturbance (both ways)
that could interfere with the process. Individual and group work obviously
present different needs regarding the size of the space. Chairs need to be 
comfortable but upright enough to encourage alertness. Special or adapted
seating is often required for people with physical problems and a physio-
therapist or occupational therapist can advise. Disabled access and mobil-
ity within the space are prerequisites, as is easy access to a disabled toilet.
Storage space is needed for instruments, either in the room or in an adjoin-
ing area. Some settings incorporate inbuilt video and audio facilities and/or
observation rooms for carers, other professionals and students. In reality this
ideal is not often possible and therapists may have to work in rooms used
for other purposes besides music therapy. In these cases care and practical
common sense are needed to create a self-contained space that guarantees
the least distraction. Usually therapists have a minimum list of prerequisites
that they regard as essential before any work can commence.
Musical instruments
The provision of high-quality musical instruments is vital. They are the tools
of the trade; good care and maintenance of the instruments are prerequi-
sites. All equipment needs to comply with health and safety regulations and
to be appropriately insured. In Plate 2.1 we see an empty but inviting music
therapy room, purpose-built for clinical work with some tuned and untuned
percussion instruments. Plate 2.2 shows a successfully adapted multi-purpose
relaxation room with a range of instruments used for music therapy groups.
Instruments from Africa, India, the Far East and South America add inter-
est, curiosity, further colour and a range of texture and sound quality to the
work. They are suggestible and can evoke a sense of play. Recommenda-
tions for a range of instruments for individual and small group work with
all ages are included in Appendix II.
The therapist will need to access some kind of harmonic support. Tradi-
tionally the piano or a portable keyboard is used and many therapists also
use guitar. Stands for the instruments and a good variety of beaters with
felt, wood and plastic heads will be needed (sometimes specially adapted 
beaters will be required). A trolley may be helpful if instruments are to be
moved around.

Practicalities and basic principles of music therapy
31
Plate 2.1 A music therapy group room
Plate 2.2 A relaxation room adapted for music therapy

32
Part I Background and context
BOUNDARIES
A boundary can be deﬁned as a physical line that delineates an area, as in
a ﬁeld boundary marking out the edge of a territory. Imagine you can walk
across this ﬁeld to the hedge and know that everything this side belongs to
you; you have the freedom to walk, gallop, graze or sleep. The other side of
the hedge is unavailable for your use. You may feel like jumping over it or
breaking it down but you have a sense where the limit is. In some ways the
therapist’s job is analogous to that of the careful farmer. Good maintenance
is the key – keeping the edges in mind and checking on them regularly. A
boundary can also delineate a speciﬁc action or a pattern of thought. We
talk of being out of bounds, off-limits, on the edge or setting our own bound-
aries. From an early age a child needs to be aware of limits. Parents need
to demonstrate consistent handling of not only physical boundaries but 
also psychological and emotional ones if their child is to feel safe. It is also
a natural urge to want to challenge and push through boundaries in our 
growing attempts at mastery and individuality. In his essay ‘On Security’
Winnicott reminds us of this lifelong struggle and the ways in which artistic
form and creativity are of immeasurable help to us in managing the tension
between safety and independence (Winnicott 1965: 30–33). Art can be
framed: music has its forms and own kinds of boundaries; for example
sound/silence, words/music. We can appreciate these features when working
as arts therapists, yet also need to tolerate a certain ﬂexibility of boundaries.
Physical and time-based boundaries
A patient is helped to feel safe and secure if the music therapy session occurs
in the same place, at the same time and for the same amount of time each
week. The physical layout and features of the room become meaningful and
important as therapy develops, contributing to a sense of containment.
Often therapists will maintain the instruments and any other objects in the
space in the accustomed place for each patient. This all adds to the evolv-
ing sense of security and predictability. In group work instruments are pre-
sented so that they are easily accessible to all members.
The boundaries of consistent day and time contribute further to the feel-
ings of predictability and expectation: there is a space in the week for the
patient to locate thoughts, feelings, actions and music. If sessions start and
ﬁnish at the same time this engenders a clear sense of beginning and end.
The amount of time allocated for each patient depends on the patient’s age
and nature of the problems. Many music therapists set aside a ‘therapeutic
hour’ (50 minutes for clinical work and 10 minutes to allow time between
appointments for departures and arrivals, reﬂection and note-keeping) for
individual adult appointments and 30–45 minutes for children (sometimes
less if the child is very young or has a very limited level of concentration).

Practicalities and basic principles of music therapy
33
There is a range from one to two hours for group work. It is important that
once an optimum time is established for each context that this is respected.
Lack of clarity over timings can lead to insecurity. The approaching end of
a session requires careful preparation. Time-based boundary issues often emerge
as part of the process requiring periods of reﬂection and supervision to unravel
their potential meaning. Some therapists do not continue with the session if
patients wish to stop before the end of the allocated time; others remain 
in the space even if the patient leaves. There are instances, however, when
sensitive adaptability is required, for example when working with terminally
ill patients to accommodate for the variable physical and emotional needs
of the patients.
The length of any therapeutic contract can be negotiated with verbal patients,
for example an initial contract of 12 sessions followed by a review. Much
creativity is required when negotiating with non-verbal and highly depend-
ent mentally ill or disabled patients. Here it may be appropriate also to liaise
with the primary carers. Careful thought is required in preparing patients
for any breaks, in particular for the ending of therapy (see Chapter 13).
An important physical boundary is the non-acceptance of any form of 
violent behaviour directed either to another patient or to the therapist.
Vulnerable patients need to feel safe and that the experience of coming to
therapy will not be physically threatening. Destruction or abuse of the envir-
onment is also not acceptable, although music therapists recognise the need
for patients sometimes to channel very strong negative feelings through 
instrumental playing. Any additional ground rules can be stated at the out-
set of the work. Once again this relates to the therapist’s value system and
clinical orientation.
Professional and ethical boundaries
As professional and student members of the Association of Professional Music
Therapists, clinicians practising in the UK must sign an agreement to abide
by the Association’s Code of Professional Ethics and Discipline (see copy in
Appendix III). This document outlines signiﬁcant boundaries important for
the protection of patients and therapists themselves.
Of central importance is the requirement to act at all times ‘in the best
interests of the patient’, maintaining a strictly professional relationship and
respecting the conﬁdentiality of the patient. Working within institutional 
settings can present challenges to providing a safe and secure place for the
work. Other staff members have to understand that effective therapeutic work
can only take place in an undisturbed space. Intrusions push against the safety
curtain surrounding patient and therapist and the evolving establishment of
trust. They can be felt as invasions of the space. There are practical ways of
protecting the space, for example by using a sign to indicate that a private
session is in progress. In teamwork there are other complex issues to work

34
Part I Background and context
through in relation to what material is totally private to the sessions and the
ongoing relationships and what can be shared in reports, team meetings and
case discussions. Treatment teams need to communicate but to have a high
level of regard for the privacy and dignity of patients. If this works effect-
ively the professional boundaries surrounding the members of the team act as
another level of security for the patient or client. Music therapists, like all
professionals, have to abide by British laws in relation to child protection
(the APMT publishes separate guidelines about this attached to the code of
ethics). Most clinical work settings will also have agreed procedures for how
any disclosures of abuse are handled and reported by individual therapists.
Conﬁdentiality is also a major issue in recording sessions on audio or 
video for supervision or teaching purposes, presenting work publicly and in
written format. Patient consent is essential here and, if granted, it is customary
to use just ﬁrst names, the patient’s initial or a pseudonym (as is done for
the case material in this book). Seeking informed consent is a delicate issue,
particularly when working with non-verbal patients or those highly depend-
ent on others through severe mental illness or disability when the therapist
may need to explore creative alternatives or seek assent from the next of kin
or the primary care staff (see Chapter 13).
Further ethical issues involve respecting the dignity and autonomy of the
patient irrespective of age, gender, sexual orientation, race, legal status and
mental state. A book on ethics in relation to music therapy practice has been
edited recently by Cheryl Dileo (2000).
Other developmental aspects of boundaries
An aspect of early mother–infant interaction is the baby’s strong dependence
on the mother and in her meeting of her baby’s all-encompassing needs as
well as she can, Winnicott’s description of ‘good enough mothering’ is
apposite (Winnicott 1965: 145). Ideally a position of trust is soon established
(see Erikson 1965 for a discussion of the ﬁrst polarity of trust versus mis-
trust). Often a stage like this can be observed in the early sessions of music
therapy when a patient seems to be merged in the music with no apparent
sense of self or boundaries. Following this early stage in infancy, mother and
baby need to separate from each other if the baby is to develop as an indi-
vidual with an emerging sense of self (and here music therapists have had
recourse to other thinkers within the object-relations school such as Melanie
Klein). In his ‘Spectrum of Consciousness’ Ken Wilber describes this pro-
cess of primary differentiation as the ‘skin-boundary’ and as ‘one of the most
fundamentally accepted self/not-self boundaries’ (Wilber 1993: 6). The baby
comes to terms with all inside as ‘me’ and all outside as ‘not me’. Musical
frames and the whole fabric of co-created music within a relationship can
be used to help establish these boundaries between ‘me’ and ‘not-me’, and
self and other.

Practicalities and basic principles of music therapy
35
A further boundary is negotiated as the child begins to draw limits
between body and mind (body/ego or soma/psyche). The child begins to assert
more autonomy and gain more control over the environment, for example
through the development of movement skills and speech. There are also vari-
ous challenges to overcome including resisting and internalising the adult direc-
tion of ‘no’ (for a concise discussion of these early developmental stages in
the context of Erikson’s stages of psychosocial development and Freud’s clas-
sic libido theory, see Brown and Pedder 1991: 37–46). The next boundary
appears when the older child begins to separate out parts of the psyche, pre-
senting a particular face to the outside world and hiding away other parts,
consciously or unconsciously. We make a further split in our mind, what
Wilber refers to as the persona/shadow boundary. Later, once the full adult
and functioning ego has been established we appear to ﬁnd safe ways of loos-
ening the boundaries; of becoming less attached; moving into a place of inte-
gration of mind, body and spirit within and beyond our environment. It is
as if we have come full circle.
Therapy can help us to put the boundaries in place, to explore what they
are, how and why we need them. It can also help to break down unneces-
sary boundaries, replace them, perhaps eventually help us to dissolve them
and, as we move towards the end of our lives, to even live without them. In
general terms Western psychological thinking has unravelled many processes
in early child and adult development. The connections Wilber makes to Eastern
traditions, particularly those linked to the second half of life, may not ﬁt
comfortably with a Western approach. Nevertheless they help patients and
therapists to explore realms beyond that of the fully integrated ego, partic-
ularly the domains of the spiritual and transpersonal (Rowan 1993).
THE QUALITIES OF THE THERAPEUTIC
RELATIONSHIP
The Eastern traditions described by Wilber in much of his writing stress a
loosening of ego and boundaries. In parallel with some Western monastic
traditions there is more focus on individual contemplation, ritual and teach-
ing over and above relationship with others. In his essay ‘On Psychological
Creativity’ James Hillman contrasts such practices with a psychology which
‘is created within the vale of living intimacy’ (Hillman 1972: 27). The essen-
tial ingredient of any therapeutic relationship is seemingly in the meeting of
two souls.
To relate implies to refer, to bring into relation to, or to connect. In the
contemporary context of therapy is stressed this interpersonal and two-way
focus of the patient–therapist relationship. Relationships are the melting-pot
for development of ‘a sense of self and self in relationship to others’ (Pelham
and Stacy 1999: 12). The word ‘relationship’ also implies an evolving

36
Part I Background and context
dynamic process bringing with it the idea of constant movement, growth 
and change. Many current theories about personal therapy emphasise the
basis in a ﬂuid relationship. Music therapy is founded in this principle as 
is indicated in the APMT deﬁnition quoted in Chapter 1. In his authoritat-
ive study Relationships: A Dialectical Perspective, the ethologist Robert
Hinde analyses and describes central issues in the ﬁeld of close relation-
ships in adulthood. In outlining some of these features, Hinde emphasises
the importance of relationships developing over time:
Relationships involve (at the behavioural level) a series of interactions
between two individuals who know each other, such that each inter-
action can be inﬂuenced by past interactions and by expectations of inter-
actions in the future. Affective and cognitive components are at least as
important as the behavioural ones.
(Hinde 1997: 48)
Hinde is describing personal relationships but the professional therapeutic
relationship helps patients by exploring the fabric of communication and dia-
logue within the therapy room. As in personal relationships, the dialogue
between patients and therapist matures and grows gradually as trust and mutual
understanding are gained. Hinde talks about people who ‘know each other’. In
therapy there is a need to balance what is known with a sense of not knowing.
The analyst can learn to follow with one eye those aspects of a patient
about which he knows he does not know, while keeping the other eye
on whatever he feels he does know. There is a creative tension between
this knowing and not knowing.
(Casement 1985: 5)
Music therapists might add ‘keeping both ears open’ in relation to follow-
ing the musical communications in the music therapy relationship, listening
to both the played and unheard music. The following sections explore
aspects of the ‘relationship’ in therapy and music therapy, how it is built and
maintained for effective treatment of patients.
To be with
At a most fundamental level is the need for the therapist just to ‘be with’
the person who is coming to therapy. Implied in this deceptively simple phrase
is one of our hardest tasks. It is difﬁcult to sit alongside and stay with what-
ever feeling the person is communicating. If the person is in pain, in distress
or confused, it is hard to resist the temptation to be active (perhaps to escape
from our own intense discomfort) and in our case to play some music or ﬁll

Practicalities and basic principles of music therapy
37
the gaps with sound. This is often in direct contrast to the needs of the patient
who may be wanting us to attend and wait even if this means staying unob-
trusively in silence and to just ‘be with’ (this little word ‘just’ again). It could
be argued that it is impossible to build up a therapeutic relationship with
any child or adult until this fundamental concept of ‘being with’ is grasped
and made apparent in the therapist’s approach.
Working alliance
This commonly used term by therapists implies a partnership, a purposeful
approach to work and to achieving therapeutic goals. On one level there are
practical issues to consider such as keeping appointments and effective time-
keeping. In addition, each working alliance will be unique with different 
patterns and goals. Patients will have varying needs and therapists will need
to indicate a sustained willingness to attend to these and continue the work.
There are obvious differences in the role limits of both parties and within
the process of long-term therapy both therapist and patient(s) work through
many different aspects of their alliance. This might involve some signiﬁcant
changes in perception and shifts in power.
Therapeutic attitude and presence
The terms ‘therapeutic attitude’ (how we think about our work) and ‘ther-
apeutic presence’ (how we actually are in the room with our patients) are
also commonly used. These are difﬁcult concepts to communicate and are
more related to the therapist’s set of values, beliefs and self-awareness.
Patients need to know that their therapists are there for them; they need to
feel safe. However, as with all aspects of forming relationships, it is difﬁcult
to identify techniques or skills that will help with the growth of a particular
attitude. We can observe some therapists working with groups of patients
who seem to have a natural therapeutic presence; others seem to struggle in
spite of a similar amount of training and range of skills. Therapeutic pres-
ence seems to relate to how comfortable and conﬁdent therapists feel within
and about themselves. It has a lot to do with the quality of attention and
listening given to patients who need to feel that their every communication
is valued and really heard, features that go beyond any particular clinical
orientation. Posture and the therapist’s sense of continued alertness are 
also important. There are some links here with the role of a conductor in a
musical ensemble. A music therapist facilitates an unfolding process and 
exploration of feelings, sounds and words; a sensitive conductor assists the
musicians to articulate the composer’s intentions. Both roles involve being
a kind of sounding or resonating board through which these processes can
ﬂow freely.

38
Part I Background and context
Musical empathy and resonance
What is meant by empathy? One deﬁnition offered by Rogers suggests 
that it:
. . . involves being sensitive, moment by moment, to the changing felt
meanings which ﬂow in this other person, to the fear or rage or tenderness
or confusion or whatever that he or she is experiencing. It means tem-
porarily living in the other’s life, moving about in it delicately without
making judgements.
(Rogers 1980, cited by Egan 1994: 106)
As stated above we have a responsibility to demonstrate that we are listen-
ing to our patients with real focused attention. This kind of intense listen-
ing to the quality of verbal and non-verbal sounds, to the pace, to the feelings
behind any music being played is not an everyday occurrence. The therapist
moves across various listening dimensions, listening to the world of the patient
and the therapist’s own musical and personal responses. Such shifts relate
to the different modes of consciousness: the world of the client, the thera-
pist’s professional world and the therapist’s personal world, as outlined by
Bruscia (1995a).
Demonstrating empathy takes us a step further than attentive listening. 
It links to being open to the other person and to the therapeutic concept 
of resonance. As musicians we are familiar with this, Rowan quoting the ex-
ample of a note being struck on one piano in a room and the similar string
on another piano in the room resonating in sympathy (Rowan 1993: 55).
However, this feeling of identity is not sufﬁcient as we can note in the devel-
opment of a musical metaphor in the following passage by Casement.
Empathic identiﬁcation is not enough, as it can limit a therapist to 
seeing what is familiar, or is similar to his own experience. Therapists
therefore have to develop an openness to, and respect for, feelings and
experiences that are quite unlike their own. The greater freedom they
have to resonate to the unfamiliar ‘keys’ or dissonant ‘harmonics’ of 
others, the more it will enhance their receptivity to these unconsciously
interactive cues that are often central to an understanding of patients.
(Casement 1985: 95)
Inge Nygaard Pedersen develops a total listening attitude in her work with
schizophrenic patients. She describes it ‘as a state of “being very aware” –
as if I am in a state of extreme preparation for resonating with any signal
or vibration coming from the patient but, at the same time, not invading the
patient’ (Pedersen 1999: 31). This is particularly the case when attempting
to resonate with those unfamiliar keys of others described by Casement.

Practicalities and basic principles of music therapy
39
Pedersen also discusses states of listening that grow out of this ‘being very
aware’, states that are described as autocentric ways of listening and ones
that expand to listening in a slightly altered state of consciousness.
While acknowledging that it is impossible to see or hear the world com-
pletely as another person does, we can do all we can to understand the world
of our patients from their perspectives. Music therapists are fortunate in 
having the medium of music as a means of ‘sounding out’ that we have heard
what our patients are trying to communicate to us. We can reﬂect back sounds
and begin to engage in an empathic musical dialogue. We can play a
reﬂective musical phrase in response to a patient’s long silence. We can note
how the patient’s music makes us feel and any subsequent reactions to our
musical interventions. Musical empathy is not just imitation or parroting but
a subtle dynamic process. We can use both music and words (if appropri-
ate) to reﬂect back or interpret, for example we can play our response or
suggest that ‘your music feels like x or y’. The varied contribution of patient
and therapist (similar or strongly contrasted) can be held together in a 
delicate or robust web of ﬂexible musical improvisation. There is the poss-
ibility that simultaneously the partners can both be themselves and be aware
of each other, given the careful listening and responsive framework provided
by the music therapist.
SOME FEATURES DRAWN FROM
PSYCHOANALYTIC THEORY
Music therapy in the late twentieth century was strongly inﬂuenced by 
psychoanalytic thought. Many music therapists have undertaken supervision
with psychotherapists, had personal therapy or analysis and a number have
themselves trained as child or adult psychotherapists. Formative discussion
by writers such as Priestley (1975, 1994) Odell-Miller (1995), Heal Hughes
(1995), John (1995) and Towse (1995) has explored the relationship between
psychoanalytic psychotherapy and music therapy practice and highlighted
areas of similarity and difference between the disciplines. Heal Hughes and
Odell-Miller developed the term ‘psychoanalytically informed music therapy’
in their writings in the 1990s and some therapists have found this a useful
description of practice. The following sections highlight concepts that we 
consider are being used widely by clinicians to inform their work.
The constructs of holding and containment
The importance of various practical boundaries that help to provide a safe
and supportive frame in which the therapeutic process can be protected and
begin to be nurtured has been discussed in an earlier section. In describing
musical empathy it was suggested that the therapist might ‘hold together’

40
Part I Background and context
disparate communications within a musical structure or web and that this
might be helpful to the patient. So what are the holding and containing prop-
erties of music and of the therapist?
Therapists constantly refer to holding and containing a patient’s feelings.
What do we mean by these terms? We can begin by imagining some dif-
ferent kinds of holding: the baby held in a mother’s arms, the comfort of a
friend’s embrace or the intimate holding between lovers. How can we hold
a patient effectively in music therapy? What is the most appropriate model?
Many therapists use features of the mother’s holding as a metaphor for the
work. Winnicott (1974) described this early holding as full of contact, non-
verbal, highly intuitive and intimate. It is a supportive kind of holding with-
out any judgement, words or interpretation. It is non-invasive and ﬁnely
balanced; the mother wants both to protect the child and yet encourage indi-
viduality. It is of note that the image of the mother or parent holding the
baby is commonly associated with a musical ‘holding’. The unselfconscious
parent will naturally shape vocal melodies to soothe a fretful baby, or sing
a lullaby to welcome sleep. The pattern and phrase shape, the tone of voice
and the repetition all contribute: the musical form thus ‘echoes’ the arms of
the parent. Initially both aspects go together but gradually music can be used
to stand for the embrace. Perhaps at a later developmental stage the child
can sing a familiar song alone to hold some particular feelings. Josephine
Klein explores in detail the different qualities of holding offered by the ther-
apist (Klein 1995: 72–93). She emphasises the importance of holding as recogn-
ising, accepting and understanding feelings of the patient (ideas linked to ‘being
with’ described earlier) and goes on to highlight the idea of pattern in the
therapist’s use of words:
Words enable us to make patterns and to hold on to patterns. It is the
patterns that give events their meaning and signiﬁcance . . . Patterns of
words enable us to reﬂect, to communicate and elaborate meaning.
(Klein 1995: 86)
Pattern is also a building block of music; tiny patterns are the starting point
of non-verbal contact that may be elaborated and extended in richly varied
ways. Words can be added to interpret, spoken or sung by therapist or patient.
In Case study 1 of this chapter, the therapist needed to recognise and accept
how badly Sergio felt when presented with the possibility of playing music.
For him the only choice was to put things away and withdraw. The soft gui-
tar music of the ﬁrst few sessions acknowledged this and the simple musical
pattern with chord sequence and voice was perhaps consoling for Sergio.
However, a few weeks on, a stronger improvised song could also ‘hold’ the

Practicalities and basic principles of music therapy
41
new energy and aggression of his stick throwing. The holding was achieved
by the therapist understanding the need to wait, and by providing gentle and
then energetic music to match the moment.
Allied to the concept of holding is containment. What is the purpose of 
containment in therapy? A patient needs to feel held and supported and also
to be aware that the therapist is not only consistent but also able to con-
tain, stay with and manage whatever is communicated, however difﬁcult the
expression. Can the therapist contain all the wanted and unwanted parts, all
the bits that hurt or need exploring or discarding?
What do we mean by a container? It can be used to hold things; items
both wanted and unwanted. Containers can be retained and stored with the
contents used at a later date, put out of sight or even discarded. In music
therapy there are many opportunities for both the therapist and the music
to act as containers. The patient is able to project all kinds of communica-
tions not only towards the therapist but also to articulate them musically
through the instruments. A myriad of feelings, including difﬁcult and
painful ones, can be aired and explored. In this way the instruments – in
many instances they even look like physical containers, as in the case of the
inverted drum catching sticks for Sergio – can act as containers. When the
therapist improvises with the patient, the therapist can begin to get a sense
of these feelings, to work with them and to contain them further in organic
musical frames. Joint attention can be given to this co-created musical activ-
ity. Some meaning may begin to evolve from what in the ﬁrst instance may
sound confused and chaotic. If, for example, the patient presents some very
fragmented and confused sounds then the therapist’s response may weave
some connections between the fragments and help the patient gain insight
and understanding.
The constructs of transference and 
counter-transference
Therapists make different choices about what they notice and attend to in
interactions with patients. Clarkson, in giving an overview of a range of psy-
chotherapeutic approaches, argues that a number of different modalities of
relationship are present in every therapeutic meeting:
Like the keys on a piano, some of them may be played more frequently
or more loudly than others, depending on the nature of the music. But
they are always potentially there in every therapeutic encounter whether
or not the pianist uses them, whether or not the composer acknowledges
their existence in the written score.
(Clarkson 1994: 28)

42
Part I Background and context
Attending to ‘transference’ might be one of these modalities. The music 
therapist can choose to note its existence, to feel and recognise its effects and
to try to understand what it may mean for the patient, or to work in other
ways.
What is commonly understood by the mental construction of transference?
Gray observes that there are elements of this phenomenon of ‘transference’
in all relationships in that we bring expectations and assumptions to new
encounters, transferring them from past experience of relating (Gray 1994:
21). When a patient comes to therapy there will invariably be a complex range
of feelings directed towards the therapist, some positive and some negative.
Feelings or attitudes felt towards earlier signiﬁcant people in the patient’s
past life (usually parental or other authority ﬁgures) will be transferred in
an unconscious way into present relationships and onto the therapist. The
therapist may become aware of receiving projections of both a positive (for
example loving feelings) and negative kind (for example feelings of attack);
or at different times aspects of both.
The therapist in the opening clinical example receives a striking experience
of Sergio’s powerlessness within the transference in his packing up and guard-
ing over the instruments. He is perhaps too frightened to engage in any con-
tact with her and school reports show that his halting speech makes verbal
contact with others fragmented and frustrating. His mother is very pro-
tective and perhaps Sergio expects the therapist to take over? Observing and
accepting some of this sustains the therapeutic work – the approach helps
the therapist to acknowledge his behaviour and wait till he is ready to make
new responses.
Therapists also develop strong feelings towards their patients. These are con-
strued as counter-transferences, deﬁned succinctly by Priestley as ‘all of the
unconscious reactions that a therapist has towards a patient, and especially
to the patient’s transference’ (Priestley 1994: 74). Originally these feelings 
were thought to be obstacles, unresolved conﬂicts in the therapist’s past being
transferred on to the patient (Brown and Pedder 1991 and see Priestley 
1994: 81–85 for a discussion of this classic form of counter-transference). 
More recently it has been felt that honest and reﬂective exploration of our
counter-transference issues can be a resource in gaining insight into a
patient’s therapeutic process, a sensitive ‘tuning-in’ of the therapist’s uncon-
scious to the worlds of the patient. Sometimes the feelings are body-based
with a particular somatic resonance. By working empathically the therapist
can identify with what the patient is feeling/has felt or be able to locate feel-
ings with which the patient is struggling or unable to recognise. Priestley calls

Practicalities and basic principles of music therapy
43
this the e-counter-transference (after Racker’s ‘concordant identiﬁcation’ 
– see Racker 1968, and Priestley 1994: 87–92). She draws on the musical 
‘image of a plucked string instrument (the patient) whose music resonates
on its sympathetic strings (the therapist) . . .’ (ibid.: 86).
Alternatively the therapist may start to feel, for example, in the role of
the distant mother or father (Priestley labelling Racker’s notion of ‘com-
plementary identiﬁcation’ the c-counter-transference – see Racker 1968 and
Priestley 1994: 85–87). Carpy observes that the therapist’s ﬁrst task is ‘to
attempt to tolerate these feelings, without acting them out’, while acknow-
ledging that this can be incredibly demanding to achieve (Carpy 1989: 288).
Gray notes that in using counter-transference the therapist has to be
‘scrupulously honest in determining who is feeling what and why and it should
not be the basis for making didactic interpretations. Delicacy, self-questioning
and insight are vital, greatly aided by experience of supervision and personal
therapy’ (Gray 1994: 24).
In the clinical example Sergio’s therapist has some contrasting reactions in
her own counter-transference. She feels protective towards him (the recall
of the hamster she wanted) but also personally redundant and useless. She
does not know what to play or do and has to sit with this feeling, trying to
understand the implications for Sergio. She also feels quite irritated, wanting
to tell Sergio to get on with it, recalling perhaps the control of his parent.
The aggressiveness of the arrow song combines her feelings with those of
Sergio.
It is usual for a psychotherapist to use words to bring the transferences 
and counter-transferences into the working context of the therapeutic rela-
tionship and to use interpretation to illuminate the process. Music therapists
have a range of interesting options, one of which might be to use words. But
working with music means that these rather abstract constructions can be
articulated in the living forms of active and mutual musical creativity.
Streeter (1999b) has developed the notion of the ‘musical transference rela-
tionship’ proposing that ‘what we offer in free improvisation is free asso-
ciation within music’ (ibid.: 88). As music therapists we can also articulate
and express in music aspects of our counter-transference, either if appropriate
with the patient or in supervision (see Chapter 13) or privately. We can also
articulate counter-transference phenomena in other artistic media, moving
or drawing aspects of the dynamics. Bruscia’s compilation The Dynamics of
Music Psychotherapy includes a comprehensive review of both transference
and counter-transference phenomena in music therapy with illustrated case
material (Bruscia 1998).

44 
Part I Background and context
Developmental
biological 
individual/separation 
pre-school/educational 
developmental psychology 
stages in growth 
cognitive
Physiological
body-based
biochemical
medical
neurological
measurable
predictable
Supportive
persona/shadow 
here and now 
short-term/one-off 
counselling models 
airing of feelings 
supports defences
Psychodynamic
mind/body 
psychoanalytical 
long-term reconstructive 
transference/ 
counter-transference 
explores defences
Humanistic
whole self/environment 
holistic 
self-growth 
here and now 
eclectic 
explores potential
Transpersonal
integrative 
mind/body/spirit 
loosening ego 
beyond time/space 
peak experiences 
soul
Figure 2.2 The music therapy spectrum.
THE MUSIC THERAPY SPECTRUM
It is clear from the clinical material presented in this book that each thera­
pist brings to the work a particular clinical orientation that can be linked to 
personal values and larger philosophical views. At the centre of all the work 
is the musical relationship. Hence we place music at the centre of our figure 
representing the music therapy spectrum (see Figure 2.2). The spectrum focuses 
on six approaches that can underpin music therapy practice. Some of these 
selected approaches are directly linked to boundary issues discussed above in 
relation to Wilber’s ‘Spectrum of Consciousness’, for example the emphasis 
on strengthening the ego boundary at the root of much psychoanalytical prac­
tice and conversely the loosening of this in transpersonal therapy. Different
MUSIC

Practicalities and basic principles of music therapy
45
contexts often demand different approaches, for example work with coma
or stroke patients in medical settings may emphasise a more physiologically
based approach. Obviously this kind of spectrum is not a rigid structure.
A therapist working in a school, for example, might integrate a develop-
mental approach with reﬂections from a psychoanalytical perspective, not
working actively with transference phenomena but using insights from these
constructs to inform practice. Pavlicevic has recently described music therapy
for the ‘whole’ child, exploring ‘“childhood” and “pathology” from various
perspectives without aligning itself with any one at the expense of the another’
(Pavlicevic 2001: 14). What we feel is important is to be aware at which level
we are working and to position this clearly within our own level of training
and experience. The needs of the patients will often dictate the level of work.
It may be inappropriate, for example, to work in an active psychodynamic
way in short-term open groups on an acute psychiatric ward with very ill and
frightened patients. Crisis management with teenagers in mainstream schools
may call for short-term intervention at a highly supportive level. Conversely
it may be very appropriate to work in a psychoanalytically informed way
with an individual contracting for long-term work. We do not want to imply
that any one level of work on the spectrum is the more important.
ESSENTIAL ‘I’s OF MUSIC THERAPY PRACTICE
We now move the discussion to four areas that we consider essential for 
effective practice. These ﬁelds of imagination, intuition, improvisation and
intellect are not the sole property of music therapy nor of art itself. In all
working situations we feel it is vital to be aware of the enlivening and sus-
taining nature of these processes.
On imagination
Imagination is no longer conceived as simplistically opposed to percep-
tion and reason; rather, perception and reason are recognized as being
always informed by the imagination. With this awareness of the funda-
mental mediating role of the imagination in human experience has also
come an increased appreciation of the power and complexity of the uncon-
scious, as well as new insight into the nature of archetypal pattern and
meaning.
(Tarnas 1991: 405)
Imagination occupies a signiﬁcant space in therapy practice. Though it may
be hard to articulate it is one of our most effective tools. William Blake thought
that the imagination was the divine principle in man and vitally important
to all human existence. In the commentary that accompanies the visionary

46
Part I Background and context
water-colour painting The Last Judgement he states: ‘This world of
Imagination is the world of Eternity; . . . This World of Imagination is
Inﬁnite & Eternal’ (Blake’s Notebook for the Year 1810 cited in Keynes 1966:
605). One could argue that a fundamental responsibility of the arts thera-
pist is to provide opportunities for patients to harness their imagination. A
depressed patient, for example, can give ﬂight to all manner of imaginative
fancy, play with different identities and gain more sense of personal author-
ity and empowerment through active involvement.
Different realities can be created: a very deprived child, for example, 
can enter a magical realm and feel not only in control but able to inﬂuence
people and objects. Perhaps nothing else compares to imagination in import-
ance? It is that which inspires and fortiﬁes us: it gets us out and moves us
on. Such an idea was movingly encapsulated in the drama therapist Sue
Jennings’ work with patients undergoing fertility treatment (presented at con-
ferences in the UK in the 1990s). She was passionate about the need for her
patients to feel fertile in their minds and hearts, when the apparently fallow
ground of their bodies defeated them. Sometimes pregnancy was a reward,
but a restored imagination was always achievable. Arts therapies can often
make this sort of contribution to a team, evoking all types of imagination
including the visual, auditory and tactile. Valuing the imaginative process
should be part of our job description.
However, to enable our patients to be in touch with their imagination we
have ﬁrst to be so ourselves. This may not be at all straightforward. It is not
a ‘given’ that we use our imagination, even though there is an implication
that those involved with the arts will do so. There is much that stands in the
way. It could be that our patients’ difﬁculties affect us dynamically, block-
ing our ability to think or act clearly. Also just the long days in the caring
professions can leave any worker depleted, tired and stuck. We can easily
get bored and boring, as in any job. We need to guard against potential 
‘burnout’ (see Chapter 13). However, in arts therapy practice and training,
the principle of attending to present feelings within the art form may be 
one of the best gifts to the imagination. Many professional players who have
trained later as music therapists have reported on a reawakening of feeling
response, more playful spontaneity, risk and energy in their playing. The
reworking of their music in this way has often brought about truer involve-
ment of the personal self. Perhaps we give something back to our parent art
forms by such a concentration.
Stephen Sondheim’s song about creative process, ‘Finishing the Hat’
from Sunday in the Park with George, emphasises this link between feeling
and image. His character George sings of how he maps a sky in his mind.
It ﬁlls his mental and feeling space and everything else recedes behind his
potent vision. All the levels of connection, the word patterns, the weaving
of idea, texture and sound are brought together with ﬁne imagination. We
each need to ﬁnd our own sparks and connections. As Winnicott suggests,

Practicalities and basic principles of music therapy
47
in his posthumous collection of essays Home is Where we Start From, this
spirit can be found in unexpected places, as much in doing the cooking as
in making art (Winnicott 1986: 51). It is incumbent on all of us to listen care-
fully to ourselves, to keep in touch with a lively spirit, to refresh our sources
of inspiration and to remember our humanity. ‘All action is born in the 
laboratory of the imagination’ (Ferrucci 1990: 43).
. . . imagination activates our psychological and transpersonal resources.
First, by inventing possible worlds the mind learns to transcend its own
stereotypes. Second, when we use our imagination we are not bound to
duties or stopped by obstacles – we are free to play. No longer weighed
down by the real world, we can let chance and the unconscious do their
part – above all we can laugh. At the same time, inhibitions loosen up
and the resources that everyday life perennially restricts can reach full
ﬂower. In this way imagination becomes a way to freedom.
(Ferrucci 1990: 46–47)
We need to note however that imagination, like therapy, needs limits 
and boundaries. Unbridled imagination carries the risk of madness or even
death, if not held within a rational frame or perspective. Selection, reﬁne-
ment, form, limits, deadlines – these are thinking processes, which are
needed to accompany the imaginative drive. Such a frame of thought gives
meaning, focus and safety to the creative process.
On intuition
We are using the words of the historian Theodore Zeldin to make a transi-
tion between the worlds of the imagination and intuition. Zeldin observes:
Imagination has only been truly liberating when it has been construct-
ive . . . It is impossible to feel fully alive unless one takes risks, so those
who have refused to take risks . . . have hesitated to live fully.
The direction of thinking has been decided by intuitions, which are
sometimes hypotheses and sometimes judgements reached so fast that
the reasons for them are not noticed. Women’s intuition has been 
neither magic nor genius but the result of close attention to minute signs
and an interest in unspoken emotions: it is as rational, and elusive, as
medical diagnosis, using past experience in the face of uncertainty; 
but it is never easy to learn from experience, because two experiences
are seldom exactly alike; an imaginative jump is needed to spot the 
similarities.
Zeldin (1995: 442)
How can the points that Zeldin makes help us as practising clinicians?

48
Part I Background and context
Case study 2
Imagine that a group of severely anxious people have met regularly for six months
with their therapist. This week sees the introduction of a student. The therapist has
been gently encouraging the group members to take small steps with their feelings
and to risk some new encounters. It has been difﬁcult with many obstacles to face:
their illnesses, their lack of conﬁdence, difﬁdence and social isolation. On this day
the group has improvised twice with members being somewhat reluctant to articu-
late any immediate feelings. Perhaps the presence of the student has increased the
group’s anxiety. The therapist’s overall feelings are those of stuckness and lack of
direction. The therapist knows what is at stake for each individual and has a rea-
sonable understanding of the needs of the group. But the visiting student provides
a new opportunity and challenge for everyone, the therapist included. The therapist
feels physically the sense of loss and emptiness within the group – feelings that
supervision has revealed regularly and consistently as being part of the dynamic of
the group.
The music pauses, the stuck feeling continues and the therapist has an intuitive
response that the student could offer something. This is a risk. Some passing ges-
tures and a whispered enquiry bring the idea from the student that she should sing
a rather poignant song – an Eastern European folk melody about autumn and the
decay of the natural world. The risk pays off because a new connection is made.
The group is taken away from the immediate preoccupation of their own painful
experiences to a more universal perspective, while still maintaining the link with 
individual feelings. The group members are very curious about the meaning of the
song and talk in an animated way about their reactions. This sense of liveliness 
has not occurred for many weeks. Out of this intuitive moment has come a shift
in the obstacles within the group therapy process. The individual has been linked
to the collective. The student is amazed by the potential power of her contribution
– a beautifully crafted song presented with an innocent directness, as if telling 
a story.
In this session an honest risk was involved in inviting the student to sing but
the request was also logical in the way it emerged from the natural unfold-
ing of the session. What appeared as spontaneous was embedded in the frame
of previous knowledge: of the session; of the group and the therapist’s level
of expertise, rather in the way that a musician needs the hours of practice
before playing can appear natural and spontaneous.
Intuitive knowledge . . . proceeds from everything we know and every-
thing we are. It converges on the moment from a rich plurality of 

Practicalities and basic principles of music therapy
49
directions and sources – hence the feeling of absolute certainty that is
traditionally associated with intuitive knowledge.
(Nachmanovitch 1990: 40)
As with the other processes in this section intuition can also link creatively
with the rational. ‘Intellect has, ﬁrst, the valuable and necessary function of
interpreting, i.e., of translating, verbalizing in acceptable mental terms, the
results of intuition’ (Assagioli 1965: 223).
On improvisation
Improvisation is at the core of music therapy practice and is the action-
product of our musical imagination and intuition, or ‘intuition in action’ as
described by Nachmanovitch (1990: 41). Improvisation forms an interesting
link between our discipline and other modes of work in music and the arts.
Jazz, Flamenco, Indian and African traditions in music all use improvisa-
tion centrally; theatre and dance have long established usage of improvisa-
tion in preparation and performance. The New Grove Dictionary of Music
and Musicians deﬁnes improvisation as ‘the creation of a musical work, or
the ﬁnal form of a musical work, as it is being performed’ discussing its
signiﬁcant existence in ‘virtually all musical cultures’ of the world (Nettl 2001:
94). An earlier edition of the Grove Dictionary in 1954 saw improvisation as
‘the art of thinking and performing music simultaneously’, an idea that Bailey
thought was rather derogatory to the non-improviser playing pre-composed
music (cited in Bailey 1992: 66). However, this deﬁnition provides a useful
link with what music therapists try to do in their work, thinking of musical
and clinical requirements while playing ‘in the moment’. It also emphasises
our theme of connection between the imaginative, spontaneous process and
the need for active thought as boundary or shape.
Although the ﬁrst British texts on music therapy seemed to make some
categorical distinctions between playing therapeutic pieces and creative free
improvisation, twenty-ﬁrst-century music therapists would probably have a
more ﬂuid idea of their work. Sometimes the music of sessions might start
from established repertoire, for example with the song a patient brings to a
group, but this can easily become played with and loosened. There might be
changes in pace, style and expression, words altered by the patient’s current
feelings, the group’s adaptations, harmony dramatically changed, rhythm
adapted to match ﬂagging or rising energy. Likewise, work that begins
wordlessly with the exchange of expressive sounds might travel in any direc-
tion, perhaps ending with recall of some particular instrumental music 
or song. There is more the sense of a continuum of improvisation used in
clinical practice with free playing at one end working through improvising
in various styles, extemporising on themes or pieces back to working loosely
with (or even performing) a written piece. Both Darnley-Smith and Simpson

50
Part I Background and context
describe just such a continuum in their respective work in music therapy with
older adults. In this setting the therapist’s clinical judgement about the
needs of the client dictated the level of pre-composed material, structure and
freedom used in the work (Darnley-Smith 2001; Simpson 2000).
Throughout the music therapy profession, there is an emphasis on ‘play-
ing’ and this being linked to authentic expression of the self. By exploring
with colours and textures as the patient, and mixing this with fragments and
ideas from musical and personal history, in dialogue with the therapist or
other group members, we can be more in contact with ourselves, more alive,
more feeling. Interestingly this idea is echoed by a professional classical player,
the clarinetist Anthony Pay, who said, in an interview with Bailey, that he
thought of improvisation as ‘unknown poetry in which I can progress’ and
contrasted this to playing precisely notated music where he felt he was ‘just
learning to do better what I already do’ (Bailey 1992: 69).
We suspect that cultural inﬂuences and late twentieth-century shifts in music
practice and education have had their impact here. The Western classical tra-
dition of concert-going (experts play, well-behaved audiences listen) still holds
sway but is beginning to be questioned by writers such as Cook (1998) and
Small (1998). The edges between traditional and popular forms from diverse
cultures begin to be blurred by the improvisatory experiments of celebrated
classical and pop artists. Nachmanovitch explores the weight and signiﬁc-
ance of improvisation in an inspirational way in his book of unusual ‘light-
ness’ Free Play, quoted at the beginning of this section.2 Many ideas leap
out for consideration, but here are some that emphasise why improvisa-
tion is the central force in music therapy. Firstly, the emphasis on the
unfolding process rather than the end moment of public performance is a
prevailing theme in the book. ‘Not only is practice necessary to art, it is art’
(Nachmanovitch 1990: 68). For the therapist the private work with patients
exploring and experimenting with sounds and music has something in com-
mon with the musician’s world of personal practice. Both are part of ‘real
music’ and by this analogy a necessary process in exploring our real selves.
Secondly, Nachmanovitch argues that improvisation, in its concentration
on ‘the moment’ involves what he calls ‘continuous surrender’ – giving up
control and allowing the surprising to happen. ‘Improvisation is acceptance,
in a single breath, of both transience and eternity. We know what might 
happen in the next day or minute, but we cannot know what will happen’
(ibid.: 21). Linking with Anthony Pay’s ‘unknown poetry’, this is very much
the arena of music therapy, and also the analytic approach described by
Casement. ‘The therapist’s openness to the unknown in the patient leaves
more room for the patient to contribute to any subsequent knowing; and
what is thus jointly discovered has a freshness which belongs to both
(Casement 1985: 26–27).
2 We are grateful to Simon Purcell for introducing us to this thought-provoking book.

Practicalities and basic principles of music therapy
51
A third idea is the ‘inside-out’ relationship between free play and limits,
between spontaneity and security. Nachmanovitch describes all kinds of 
limits, such as the length of time, the shape and size of our hands, the size
of the playing space and suggests that any of these frames or structures can
‘ignite spontaneity’. He quotes Stravinsky’s reﬂection that ‘The more con-
straints one imposes, the more one frees one’s self of the chains that shackle
the spirit’ (ibid.: 84), the paradox of structure offering liberation. Therapists
might interpret these ‘constraints’ as strong clear boundaries. Again the notion
of bringing an intellectual frame to shape the imaginative, intuitive free musi-
cal play comes to the fore.
A ﬁnal note on intellect
In each of the three sections above – imagination, intuition and improvisa-
tion – were included comments that focused on the containing and framing
aspects of the intellect. Excessive imagination unregulated by the rational
world can lead to chaos and disintegration; we need to translate and make
sense of the intuitive moment through the intellect. Improvisations are held
in musical pattern and form, the composer Alfred Nieman noting on many
occasions during his teaching of music therapy classes that even the freest
of improvisations contained within it an inherent logic and formal cohesion.
This rational underpinning or overarching (depending on one’s perspect-
ive) is a fundamental feature of effective music therapy practice. The ‘think-
ing’ of the clinician based on observation, clinical knowledge and experience
is what distinguishes music therapy from music-making, education or the pure
art. In training and clinical practice, therapists build a body of knowledge
about features of illness, human development, theoretical constructs and musi-
cal forms and gradually accumulate a framework for shaping differentiated
approaches to treatment, based on the needs of different client groups. The
therapist needs to interact sensitively with clients, but at the same time to
be able to watch the interaction, to note key points and changes and to relate
to mental constructs that underpin the work. The intellectual side of the work
will also involve reading; relating work to knowledge of the client group;
developing aims and strategies; planning for breaks and endings; discussing
ideas in clinical teams; exploring appropriate theory and devising research.
In this way, the intellect complements and supports the artistic areas char-
acterised in the other three ‘I’s.
SUMMARY
In this chapter a range of principles in music therapy practice were explored.
These ranged from the highly pragmatic – physical aspects of the music 
space, range of instruments – to the complexities of the different levels and

52
Part I Background and context
approaches within the work. We return to this subtle synthesis of both the
musical and the personal in the relationships within music therapy. Patients
with their unique range of musical behaviours and problems come to ther-
apy where they interact with therapists who in turn have to balance their
own music and personalities, including their own blind spots, in order to attend
a therapeutic process and take part in the journeys with their patients. All
this imaginative and intuitive musical free play is contained within the hold-
ing forms and conceptual frameworks of music therapy.
The next chapter will introduce four prominent British music therapists,
learning something of their musical and personal background and their 
motivation to train as therapists.

Chapter 3
First meetings with four
music therapists
Leslie Bunt and Sarah Hoskyns
INTRODUCTION
The contribution made by practitioners to the development of the music 
therapy profession has tended to be passed on orally rather than in written
documentation. To some extent this has been addressed recently by the series
of interviews entitled ‘Historical Perspectives’ initiated in 1999 by Gary Ansdell
and published in the British Journal of Music Therapy. This chapter uses 
interviews with four prominent British music therapists – Jean Eisler, Helen
Odell-Miller, Elaine Streeter and Tony Wigram – to explore links between
personal history and the motivation to train as a therapist.
Our interviewees, who represent different strands and traditions of prac-
tice, have each in their own unique way contributed signiﬁcantly to the last
30 years of the profession. Jean Eisler is one of a group of therapists who
have developed the work of Paul Nordoff and Clive Robbins; their initial
emphasis on the importance of the music and the notion of the ‘music child’
as it extends throughout a person’s whole life. Helen Odell-Miller has been
passionate about developing specialist work within adult psychiatry, teach-
ing and supervision. Elaine Streeter has made substantial contributions to a
reﬂective understanding of music therapy practice, particularly with links 
to psychoanalytic perspectives and supervision. Tony Wigram has made a
vital contribution to the recognition and professional status of music ther-
apy and has developed procedures for international partnership in practice
and research. All our interviewees are experienced trainers and APMT-
approved clinical supervisors. They pass on to the next generation of music
therapists their expertise, enthusiasm, experience and understanding of 
clinical practice.
We used the same questions to interview each therapist during summer to
autumn 1998. In this chapter we shall focus on their (a) formative musical
and personal experiences and (b) motivation to train and training experiences.
We shall draw on the interviews throughout the rest of the text, for example
when discussing training, supervision and research. In this way the voices of

54
Part I Background and context
these four colleagues will be woven within our own ideas and reﬂections. The
comments from each colleague are presented in italics with any of our addi-
tions being in normal script. Here is a brief description of each therapist’s
current and past positions:
Jean Eisler is a consultant music therapist at the Nordoff–Robbins Centre
in London where students observe her clinical work. Jean is a Governor of
the Centre having been connected with the organisation since she joined an
early committee in 1972 as minutes secretary. She is currently writing up case
studies for teaching purposes and for the archives of the Centre. Jean
trained in 1974 with Paul Nordoff and Clive Robbins.
Helen Odell-Miller is Director of Music Therapy Training at Anglia
Polytechnic University in Cambridge. She maintains a clinical practice in the
ﬁeld of adult mental health and is an active researcher. Helen has been Chair
of the APMT and has for many years liaised on behalf of the profession at
governmental levels regarding career and grading structures and state regis-
tration. She was involved in the setting-up of the post-training supervision
scheme. Helen trained with Juliette Alvin in 1976.
Elaine Streeter is Senior Lecturer in Music Therapy at Anglia Polytechnic
University and a tutor at the Guildhall School of Music and Drama. Elaine
completed the ﬁrst Master’s degree in music therapy and set up the course
based at Southlands College, Roehampton in 1980. She has developed music
therapy experiential groups for music therapy students. She was involved with
Helen with the setting-up of the post-training supervision scheme and was
Chair of the supervision panel for many years. Elaine trained in 1974 with
Paul Nordoff and Clive Robbins.
Tony Wigram is Professor of Music Therapy at Aalborg University,
Denmark, where he teaches and coordinates the Ph.D. programme. He is
Head Music Therapist at Harper House in Hertfordshire, UK, a diagnostic
and assessment unit for children with communication disorders. Tony has
been Chair of both the BSMT and APMT and President of both the World
Federation of Music Therapy and the European Music Therapy Confedera-
tion, a group he founded. Tony trained in 1974 with Juliette Alvin.

First meetings with four music therapists
55
FORMATIVE MUSICAL AND PERSONAL
EXPERIENCES
Jean’s story
I had a wealth of music at home throughout my childhood. We all played the piano
or string instruments and sang together from a very early age. I was lucky to be at
St. Paul’s Girls’ School when Gustav Holst was Head of Music. When I left school
I studied piano and violin in Vienna and then at the Royal College of Music. I had
six years of professional string playing including playing second ﬁddle in the
Ebsworth String Quartet. We gave concerts all over the UK and in the National
Gallery during the War. I also played in the Jacques String Orchestra, one of the
ﬁrst string orchestras to be founded in this country in the 1930s.
In 1944 I married and in January 1947 left the UK with my Czech husband
Paul Eisler and my 6-month old son John. By 1948 I was living in Prague. I had
two young children and in 1951 I tried to get into music again and gave my ﬁrst
and only violin recital in Prague. By then my husband was becoming what we nowa-
days call a dissident and was soon out of work. The political situation was getting
quite nasty. I had to earn a meagre living as a translator, which I did for 22 years,
mostly humdrum publicity material. But gradually as the political scene slowly 
eased in the late 1950s and 1960s I translated children’s books, books about Czech
music and musicians, novels and ultimately two Janácek operas including Osud for
the BBC which was performed in concert form in the early 1970s in London. My
husband died in 1966 (in a tragic mountain accident). I had been married to a
courageous ﬁghter who loved music and believed in people but who was very near
to the centre of the political storms that beset Czechoslovakia in the 1950s. In a
sense my whole history is made up of my broad musical background and then the
intense growth I underwent as a person in those difﬁcult years in Prague. I had a
very strong partner who was very loving and ‘there’ not just for me personally and
our family, but for the world and life – a very special person. After he died and
once my two boys had completed university and were both in professional jobs in
1972, I returned to the UK.
Helen’s story
My earliest musical memories are of having to sing, of literally not being able to
stop singing. I don’t have early memories of being sung to apart from when I was
about 5 or 6 and my father singing to me in quite a jovial way. I remember being
very surprised when I was about 9 and went to a new school to discover that lots

56
Part I Background and context
of people hated singing and tried to get out of singing lessons. I also had a desire
to learn the piano and the violin and had a very classical upbringing. My ﬁrst mem-
ories of music I heard at home are of classical music but also of Gilbert and Sullivan
operettas and those were my ﬁrst live musical experiences. I had two older sisters
who were learning instruments. I just started to teach myself and make up tunes
and even started to write them down when I was quite little. I found some of the
formal lessons a bit boring. I suppose the thing I loved most was playing with others.
I came from a very caring and professional family. Most of my ancestors, aunts,
uncles and grandparents were either teachers or doctors. My own parents were
both doctors. I thought about studying medicine but really I just wanted to pursue
literature and music. I suppose rather ironically, although I felt very looked after
and very secure in my family, I did go to boarding school but together with my two
sisters. How we discussed it was that this was the nearest school that suited us all.
When I look back now I think some of my personal desire to express myself through
music was to counteract some of the loneliness that I felt when I was at boarding
school, especially when I was quite young. I think I only realised that in later years.
Other people were very homesick and lonely and a bit directionless at weekends.
My weekends were ﬁlled up with playing music with other people, singing in choirs,
those sorts of thing that happen outside of the ordinary school day. Another feature
to do with my personal story is that it never occurred to me not to be looking after
others, not to think about making people better or helping them. That was around
in my family. After school I went off to study music. I didn’t want to do anything
else but to live and breathe music.
Elaine’s story
Elaine expressed strongly that you cannot disconnect music from people. In the
early part of her interview she explored the relationships with her early music
teachers and particularly noted the inspiration of a very warm and inﬂuential
teacher named Helen Hellier. I used to go to her house for my piano lessons and
it was almost like a second home. She had two pianos in her living room, there was
always the possibility of improvisation and she was very kind . . . I got into a differ-
ent way of learning and practising and making up my own pieces. The business of
being creative and making things – that was my interest rather than performing.
There was also a connection with Helen’s piano teacher. When I went to Guildhall
and studied with Buxton Orr he used to go and stay in a cottage in Dorset that
was owned by Helen’s piano teacher. That was quite a coincidence. She used to
belong to the Kensington Music Society and Buxton used to be the chair of that

First meetings with four music therapists
57
Society. So I ended up staying in this cottage at one point several years later, prob-
ably in my early thirties, and I realised that this was the cottage of my piano teacher’s
teacher. I can’t disconnect the relationships with teachers, the people and the music
together.
On deciding to go to music college I started to compose. By the end of the ﬁrst
year I’d left home and was living in a somewhat sophisticated world with very 
creative people. There were many changes. At the Guildhall you were expected to
practise, practise, practise. I wanted to study composition as a ﬁrst study but I was
the only girl who was doing composition so it was a rather difﬁcult thing to try and
do. The two teachers there who really inﬂuenced me were Edmund Rubbra who
was my composition teacher and Buxton Orr. Buxton was a doctor. He and his wife
Jean were tremendously sociable. They took me under their wing and held these
wonderful parties. Buxton was quite ﬁerce as a teacher. What I can remember was
his enormous enthusiasm. He had given up a career in medicine as a physiologist
to become a composer. There was a lot on the line for him and I think he brought
that into his teaching. He had a deep commitment. His father was in the Glasgow
Philharmonic, he had come from a musical background. He’d gone into medicine
and escaped into music. He had enormous commitment to music for his own per-
sonal reasons and he brought that across. He cared tremendously that we under-
stood. He had a great intensity about music.
I was lucky because I was also with the composer Edmund Rubbra who was an
extraordinary man, a very gentle, very quiet man. He was very interested in what-
ever you brought to him. He – like Buxton – was genuinely interested in notes and
how they could live in relation to one another, as all composers are.
Tony’s story
I started playing the piano when I was very young, about 4 years old and started
to develop playing by ear. I enjoyed playing by ear more than learning to read music.
At school Tony enjoyed popularity from being able to play by ear – television
theme tunes and things that other children enjoyed listening to. Later he was torn
between going to a university or conservatoire. There were a lot of people there
(at Bristol university) whom I admired tremendously who were very good musi-
cians. All the musical life of the university was very stimulating. That inspired me
tremendously because it was such a rich musical learning experience. Tony never
regretted not going to a conservatoire. His wife went after her degree and
commented that the atmosphere was entirely different from university. It was much
more competitive with much less social life and collective music making.

58
Part I Background and context
MOTIVATION TO TRAIN AND TRAINING
EXPERIENCES
Jean’s story continues
Within four weeks of arriving in the UK I chanced on Nordoff and Robbins’
‘Therapy in Music for Handicapped Children’ and had met Sybil Beresford-Peirse
(later founder and Director of the N-R Centre). She’d played me some of their
tapes and I’d become totally hooked on the idea of music therapy. Sybil asked me
to join a committee she was setting up (someone to take the minutes). The com-
mittee was raising money to bring Nordoff and Robbins over from the USA to give
their ﬁrst long-term course in Great Britain, due to start in 1974. In September I
joined Sybil for a year as her assistant pianist at the Goldie Leigh Hospital, a resid-
ential hospital for handicapped children. I also worked at Harborough School for
autistic children. Meanwhile I was earning a little money through piano teaching. In
1974 I was accepted on to the ﬁrst Nordoff and Robbins course at Goldie Leigh
(as were Elaine and Sybil). Prior to this, from 1972 to 1973, I was also allowed,
as an exception, to join the Guildhall music therapy students in their weekly impro-
visation group with Alfred Nieman. Otherwise I had had almost no creative impro-
visation experience in my life and it was an exciting and important preliminary to
the course. It was exciting in moving my musical experience away from the printed
page. It taught me to begin to listen in a new way and to ﬁnd the music from
within myself. I found it very stimulating. One could now use one’s musical ability,
skills and awareness for somebody else. There was no performing of this or that.
One was ‘being’ a musician. I loved it.
There is almost a sense of an epiphany in Jean’s awareness of what music
therapy meant for her. It was also such a good ﬁt with her personal experi-
ences. It was the chance to bring together all of my rich musical background 
along with the quite daunting political experiences of the previous 25 years in
Czechoslovakia, a chance to assimilate and use them to understand and help 
others. Those years taught me many things about myself, about friendships and
responsibilities and the cruelties that many people have to face. I knew what it 
was like to feel alone with a family. In a way we were outcasts and isolated. In the
early years this included even speech because I didn’t yet speak Czech. I feel so
much for a child who cannot speak. I know exactly what it feels like when you sit
there dumbly and cannot explain your thoughts and feelings.
When I ﬁrst read the N-R book I had never heard of music therapy and in those
days in Czechoslovakia handicapped children were kept out of sight. Also we were
too absorbed by our own and our friends’ troubles.

First meetings with four music therapists
59
Jean was very excited with the prospect of training. I was 57 in 1972. Other
professional music jobs were out of the question. I could perhaps have done a 
little bit of teaching but music therapy was much more exciting. There was no age
barrier. It was going to draw on my very strong total life’s experiences in a way
that perhaps nothing else could have done. It was just made to measure. Instead
of coming out of that music shop with easy piano pieces for children I came out
with the Nordoff–Robbins music therapy book. It was waiting there for me.
Paul Nordoff’s inﬂuence was enormous from a musical point of view and
as part of the training there was also Clive Robbins and his tremendous enthusi-
asm for the work. He was the person who enlarged on and explained what lay
behind the way they were working. Paul brought us his approach to improvisation
in his step-by-step way of teaching. Little by little it all gathered momentum and
you began to feel you could do it too. Paul’s emphasis was on learning to feel and
hear sound, learning to listen. Then there was watching and seeing them both work
with a child and hearing their case studies. And watching the other students chang-
ing and growing in the same way as oneself. It was so new to us all. What was so
compelling was the need to learn to rely on one’s own inner music and musicality.
For me there was also the refreshing inﬂuence of the musical life of London.
I could go to concerts and hear the latest modern music. For years in Prague even
Debussy was declared ‘decadent’ and you just didn’t hear of composers such as
Stockhausen and Ligeti. So there was a whole generation of new music and com-
posers that I hadn’t heard. Today I ﬁnd it hard to realise how cut off we were.
There were also other inﬂuences from a general therapeutic point of view.
We had child psychology lectures which were quite daunting for me. There had
been no up-to-date literature of that sort available in Prague. Psychotherapy and
psychoanalysis had for many years been pretty well taboo. You couldn’t have found
Freud or Jung in English. So literally I had mountains to read. I now discovered Jung
and Winnicott. There I was being enabled and needing to develop and become more
aware of a further part of myself if I was to do this work. This was a completely
new epoch in my life.
Helen’s story continues
While I was at university I discovered music therapy. My holidays had been spent
being a nursing auxiliary in a hospital in London where my parents worked as 
doctors. I felt that it was incredible to ﬁnd something where I could use my musical
way of being together with this compulsion to help others. The other side of my

60
Part I Background and context
personal story was that my father had a major stroke during the time I was at 
university and that probably not so consciously fed into this desire to help people.
He was wheel-chair bound for the rest of his life. Again there was this emphasis
on both caring and also on sickness, a sort of disintegration if you like, around me.
After university I still wondered if I could go back to the idea of being a doctor.
Later on in therapy I looked at it in terms of trying to parallel my parents. If I 
had been a doctor I’m sure I would have ended up in psychiatry but I just wasn’t
committed to that type of long academic and scientiﬁc study. In a similar way I
considered but then ruled out teaching. I remember going to a very deprived com-
prehensive school in Luton and shadowing a friend of mine there who was already
a teacher. I could see it had quite therapeutic beneﬁts in that particular environ-
ment but couldn’t myself make the music an end in itself. I had a serious look at
speech therapy and my parents helped me get some experience sitting in on 
clinics. But it was just talking, no music. I ﬁnally came back to music therapy.
I was quite young when I decided to be a music therapist. I had been to visit
Tony Wigram whom I knew before he was a music therapist because we played
in the same orchestras. So I had found out about music therapy and been inspired
by talking to him and other people about it. If I was to have entered the profes-
sion in Britain now I would be told to probably wait a few years. I would have 
been seen as rather naïvely wanting to be a music therapist without particularly
insightful reasons for doing so. I think at the time I was very enthusiastic, perhaps
rather over enthusiastic about it. I spent a lot of my young life being driven around
by my father who was off to see a patient the night before they were about to
have an operation. I’d go along and sit in the nurse’s ofﬁce or in the car. People
chatted to me a lot and took notice. I asked a lot of questions and looked at all
their medical books. It just seemed to ﬁt into this idea that I could combine these
things. That was a good discovery.
I trained as a music therapist at the Guildhall. As part of my training at the
Guildhall I had singing lessons and I had a very inspiring teacher. I listened to a lot
of music at that time, went to opera and concerts and played music with other
music therapists and other student music therapists. I can remember that listen-
ing to new music made a big impression, for example being introduced to Britten’s
‘Turn of the Screw.’
Once again Alfred Nieman appears as an inspiring teacher. I hadn’t met 
people like that who were such free spirits. This man was a bit of a rebel in a
way, probably musically and maybe in other ways. Here he was, a very wise older
man teaching us improvisation. The ﬁrst thing he said was: ‘Here’s a piano, you
need to forget everything you’ve learnt and just go and play it.’ We spent about six

First meetings with four music therapists
61
weeks doing this, each person going up in turn and working. It all gathered momen-
tum and I learnt a tremendous amount about form and structure, freedom and 
creative possibilities in music. I used to look forward to those sessions and to feel
that I went into a different musical space. It was my ﬁrst introduction to much 
freer improvisation.
Juliette Alvin inspired me by her drive. She was very to the point and very focused
about music. My ﬁrst response to that was that it was a bit constraining in that
she was very deﬁnite about her ways of working. If you didn’t ﬁt into that model
– I think I probably did most of the time – but if you didn’t then she was very crit-
ical. So she would say things like ‘That was just dreadful music’ or throw you in the
deep end in some clinical situation and then pull whatever you had done to pieces.
I’m sure that helped me in some way but at the time I found it quite painful and
difﬁcult. Maggie Pickett inspired me as a music therapist in the way that she worked
with people with autism. And in her use of piano and song.
I think the major inﬂuence was going to a service for people with learning dis-
abilities in Cambridge, to a place that I knew was going to have a post vacant.
Tony Wigram was my supervisor and I think he really was a major inspiration. This
is interesting as for a while we then worked in different ways. I developed an early
interest in working in a psychoanalytically-informed way which he came to perhaps
later. Musically he was very inspiring. I think that was where I began to believe in
my own improvisation skills at the keyboard. He had such natural skills and I found
that I was inspired by the possibilities of what one could do. I’d ﬁnd that during a
session I had composed a song or made a piece of music that had come directly
from the work with the clients.
Elaine had a spell teaching various age groups of children after graduating
from the Guildhall and before she trained as a music therapist. She enjoyed
helping the children to improvise and write pieces. Like Jean she also came
across Therapy in Music for Handicapped Children by Nordoff and Robbins.
She continues:
I remember feeling – this is it, this is what I want to do. I wrote to the publisher
because I didn’t know anything about music therapy. It turned out that they were
just recruiting for the course in Goldie Leigh in ’74 so they sent my letter through
to Paul and Clive. That was their ﬁrst course in England. It was all very coincid-
ental. The strange thing was that the audition was held back at the Guildhall 
and there was Alfred Nieman who had taught me musical history.

62
Part I Background and context
It was an extraordinary time both people-wise and music-wise. I recently bumped
into Unni Johns who was on the course at a conference in Belgium, the ﬁrst time
I’ve seen her since the course. We were reminiscing and talking about it. It was an
astonishing time but the early ’70s were astonishing anyway. Everybody was caught
up in an enthusiastic and experimental life-style. It was very dramatic. We had one
room in the hospital, like a little storeroom and we were there day in day out being
taught by the great masters. There were love affairs that never happened and those
that did. It was a passionate time.
I learnt a lot about how to use music and how to teach myself to improvise and
ways to practise and to think about music. That was all very good and inspiring.
But I rather felt that there was the feeling that if you weren’t having the same
experience as Paul was having then you were missing it – this marvellous world 
of the so and so mode. Everybody was going, ‘Yes, wow! Isn’t it marvellous and
wonderful’ but if you had a different response, then it wasn’t so easy. Looking back,
it’s difﬁcult to know how much our particular group brought to this guru worship,
perhaps Paul would have welcomed more discussion.
There was nothing about your personal experience. There was very little about
how you actually felt – in the room with the child and how that affected what you
played. It was all about what you played and how the child responded. We edited
tapes and heard case studies like Edward and Audrey, marvellous examples, the
high points basically. But we were slogging away with these children with very difﬁcult
problems and of course they weren’t having these kind of high points and there
weren’t these developments and it wasn’t really like that.
I remember Paul’s talks on intervals and on music. These have remained with
me as an inspiration. He could be quite a scary person but he was a very big inﬂuence
at that stage. There was no other teacher. He really was a pioneer, in the true
sense of the word. I continually draw on his teaching and go back to it, back to
the essence of it, with my own students. To listen to the child within and to ﬁnd a
music which can provide a context in which the child can recognise both his or her
own responses and those of the therapist. I was extremely lucky to have been taught
by Paul and Clive. Their demanding style of teaching was I think driven by Paul’s
awareness of how little time left he had to train others to take the work further.
At the time it felt very intense but it was a time I am deeply grateful to have been
part of.
We pick up Tony’s story while he was still at university. Hearing Juliette 
Alvin speak was a similar experience to Jean’s and Elaine’s reading of an
inspirational book.

First meetings with four music therapists
63
My music professor at Bristol happened to hear of a visit by Juliette Alvin to Bath
to give a lecture on music therapy. He called me in to his ofﬁce and said that this
was probably exactly the thing you should do with your particular skills. By this time
I was doing a lot of work with the piano playing by ear, jazz and improvisation and
doing shows with students. So I went to hear Juliette Alvin and it was the most
inspiring thing that I had heard, her talk really attracted different parts of me. 
It was ﬁrstly a fascinating subject, a mixture of music and medicine. Secondly she
talked very emotionally about music and I have always been aware of the emo-
tional effects of music. Lots of pieces that I knew, mostly classical, gave me goose
bumps and a very big emotional reaction. The idea of being able to use music in
therapy work was very interesting. I had very little experience of doing anything at
all with people who were ill or sick or disabled so I had to rush off and get some
sort of holiday work ﬁnding out whether I liked working with people who were dis-
abled or ill. I worked with handicapped children for some time during the holidays.
I went straight from my degree into the post-graduate course at the Guildhall. I
didn’t take a year off so here was a very naïve and young guy who thought that
this was going to be interesting ending up on a course with fourteen girls and me.
I went straight into music therapy and have been doing it ever since July 1975. I
think I went into training because music therapy was a pioneer profession at this
time and the training course had only been going for a few years. The training 
ﬁtted into my musical background. I could see that I was going to be allowed to
do all sorts of crazy musical things in music therapy that I would not have been
able to do in music teaching for example.
One of the most signiﬁcant musical inﬂuences was Alﬁe Nieman (he appears in
all four stories) who was teaching improvisation at the Guildhall at this time. He
really made you develop an ability to improvise from inside, rather than from some
sort of cognitive musical process or learning some sort of technique. He tapped into
your potential for expressing yourself in an improvisation and creating amazing sounds
that you didn’t think you could create. He was always containing it in some way.
The other two people were Juliette Alvin and Maggie Pickett. I actually had 
placements with both of them and was witness to their different ways of using music
with clients. They both had a great intuitive ability to use music communicatively
without any inhibitions and that’s what impressed me coming from a music degree
where you were developing your performance skills but that was more controlled.
They were both quite free about how they used music, especially Maggie. I became
very impressed with their freedom and their musicality.
Maggie and Juliette were also inﬂuential from a theoretical point of view because
they were the main people on the course. Juliette was inﬂuential because of her

64
Part I Background and context
interesting mix of analytic viewpoint and orthopedagogical, remedial type of work
which she would have used in some educational situations. She taught very author-
itatively about the power of music and the inﬂuence and effect and development
of music as being the foundation of music therapy. Maggie had a tremendously
dynamic therapeutic character and you learnt a lot from her by just watching how
she interacted with patients. Sometimes you weren’t all that comfortable with her
style. She had such an uninhibited way of greeting people, right down to walking
into the hospital where we were working together and singing ‘Good Morning’ to
the porter on the way in. But she had a very gentle, caring and therapeutic way
with the clients. She just wanted them to have as much opportunity as possible to
talk about their difﬁculties and problems and then to ﬁnd a way of making music
that would support their needs. She did it very intuitively. She would perhaps say
‘Let’s just play something, or let’s sing something.’ She was very good with patients
who became emotional – she was quite an emotional lady herself – so she could
give an empathic response to people who became upset, disturbed or distressed
during therapy work which is what I learnt as basic tools of your job. From the 
theoretical point of view what I read about Rogers and his particular approach in
therapy probably was the most inﬂuential because of his advocacy of equal terms
in the relationship and positive regard for your clients.
When we started training at the Guildhall, whilst they would give us models of
other people’s theoretical approaches, we were in some way responsible for devel-
oping our own therapeutic approach. You didn’t get stuff rammed down your throat
but there are strengths and weaknesses in that and recently we have become more
aware of the weaknesses of eclecticism and the need for good strong foundations
for therapeutic work. It was useful having applied theory and practice during the
training. This is essential for music therapists as they train. It is noticeable with my
students now that they are always very interested when they have presenters who
show them a theory of work plus clinical examples.
CONCLUDING NOTE
Tony Wigram’s reference to presentations that underpin practice with crit-
ical reﬂection provides a convenient bridge to our next section that focuses
on a variety of clinical examples, framed within a range of theoretical points
of reference. Our four colleagues have all contributed to speciﬁc clinical areas:
Jean particularly with children, Helen in the area of adult psychiatry (see
Chapter 9), Elaine with children and more recently with group therapy for
music therapy students and Tony with adults and children with learning difﬁ-
culties and communication problems (for example see Eisler 1990, 1992, 1993,

First meetings with four music therapists
65
2001; Odell-Miller 1991, 1995, 1997, 1999; Streeter 1978, 1979, 1999b, 2001;
Wigram 1995, Wigram and Dileo 1995, Wigram and De Backer 1999a, 1999b).
As mentioned in the introduction to this chapter their voices will also be 
featured in other sections of the book.

This page intentionally left blank

Part II
Clinical chapters

This page intentionally left blank

INTRODUCTION
The clinical examples within this section are intended to cover the lifespan,
ranging from work with a pre-school child (Chapter 4) to older people 
with dementia (Chapter 9). Two central areas within the profession, 
namely music therapy with adults with learning disability and dementia, 
are reviewed in Chapters 6 and 9, respectively. Children with communica-
tion problems and autism are similarly well-established areas of practice: two
chapters are included here, one involving work with a child and her mother
(Chapter 4) and the other a case study of a school-aged autistic child
(Chapter 5). Two further clinical areas that are recently gaining importance
are also included: neurology (Chapter 6) and forensic psychiatry (Chapter 8).
The writers of these chapters are all recognised as leading contributors to
the particular ﬁeld in the UK, having previously presented clinical work within
their speciality both in verbal and written forms. What they also introduce
to this section is the importance of critical reﬂection. All the work presented
in this section is underpinned by reference to supporting theoretical litera-
ture and to the author’s own particular therapeutic orientation. There is 
a variety of presentation styles with several chapters also including musical
examples as supportive evidence and illustration. Consequently the music 
therapy work is rooted both within musical frames of reference and related
areas of clinical research.

This page intentionally left blank

Chapter 4
Suzanna’s story: 
Music therapy with 
a pre-school child
Leslie Bunt
INTRODUCTION
It is a paradox, perhaps best captured in music (or tones of voice), that
it is sounds and silence that link us to our earliest states of being. Our
parents would have spoken words to us as babies, but they were not 
words to us.
(Phillips 1998: 49)
Young children make spontaneous connections with music as if it has
always played a natural part in their development. Here is the very stuff of
communication, music reﬂecting fundamental aspects of what it is to be human.
It is noteworthy that researchers are becoming increasingly aware of babies
being born with ‘an inborn rhythmic coherence of body movements and mod-
ulation of effective expressions’ (Trevarthen and Malloch 2000: 4). Babies
also appear able to make instantaneous connections with the patterned and
pulse-based nature of their caregivers’ vocal sounds, movements and facial
expressions. An interactive ‘dance’ is quickly established with both partners
negotiating highly communicative and emotionally expressive narratives
that share such jointly created musical parameters as pulse, tempo, rhythm,
accent, stress, loudness, silence, pitch and melody. This is a subtle two-
way process with both ‘players’ mutually inﬂuencing the other in order to
sustain interaction and modulate emotional expression (see Malloch 1999;
Papous
ˇek 1996; Trehub et al. 1997; Trevarthen 1999). Musical patterning is
at the hub of our emotional development and cognition.
Observation of these early interactive processes can provide a frame 
for understanding aspects of improvising in music therapy with children.
Pavlicevic draws from these early processes in her synthesis of the personal
and the musical in the concept of ‘dynamic form.’ She relates this to Stern’s
notion of ‘vitality affects’, namely ‘the qualities of shape or contour, inten-
sity, motion, rhythm – “amodal” properties that exist in our minds as 
dynamic and abstract, not bound to any particular feeling or event, and
enabling us to “make sense” of the world’ (Bunt and Pavlicevic 2001: 194).

72
Part II Clinical chapters
Thus we can make connections, for example, between the speed and con-
tour of a child’s hand movement and an adult’s response in another modal-
ity, for example a vocal sound. Stern uses musical terminology to describe
these communicative potentials and, in turn, music therapists can use these
links between the personal and musical as a frame when improvising (see
Pavlicevic 1990, 1997; Robarts 1996; Stern 1985).
This chapter describes the practical ways in which music therapy assisted
a pre-school child on the autistic spectrum who presented with difﬁculties
in communication and the expression of emotions between herself and her
caregivers. If we regard musical elements as at the root of our expressive,
emotional and communicative life then:
. . . we see that disorders in any of these realms will have musical 
correspondences. Disturbances in communication may be seen – and 
experienced directly – through disturbances in the timing, sequencing,
amplitude, energy and ﬂuidity of acts and gestures, as well as in disruptions
of inter-coordinating acts with another person.
(Pavlicevic 1997: 114)
We shall discover how these disturbances can be observed within the music
and how they begin to shift and change over time. Some key features of the
child’s story will be presented rather than a complete case study. Some psy-
chobiological and developmental underpinnings have already been outlined.
Other reﬂections and concepts that will emerge from this story include:
•
changes in the music being mirrored in the child’s life outside of the 
sessions, particularly in the relationships within the child’s immediate 
family;
•
the psychoanalytic features of holding and containing within the con-
sistent boundaries of time and space (see Chapters 2 and 11);
•
the clinical techniques of reﬂecting, matching and challenging (see
Chapters 11 and 12);
•
the creative space, me/not-me, transitional objects and ‘good-enough’ 
support (Winnicott 1974 and see Levinge 1999);
•
the autistic child’s use of hard objects as described by Tustin (1992);
•
the teachings from the writings of autistic adults, for example Donna
Williams (1996);
•
further links to aspects of the child’s cognitive, social and emotional 
development.
An additional reason for selecting the following story is the involvement of
other people within the music therapy space (see Chapter 2 for a discussion
of the inﬂuence of different ‘players’). We can read here how the presence
of the child’s mother became a major feature in the unfolding of the story.

Music therapy with a pre-school child
73
The therapist decided to approach the complex nature of the child’s com-
munication difﬁculties by facilitating as many musical connections as poss-
ible between mother and child.
SUZANNA’S STORY
Suzanna was referred to music therapy by her consultant paediatrician
when she was 3 years 2 months old. Here are some of the main themes 
of a period of 22 months of therapy, 64 weekly sessions that ended just 
after her ﬁfth birthday and move to full-time schooling. She was seen at 
a community-based dedicated music therapy centre. Her mother was a 
consistent presence in the sessions and her comments are included here.
Brief background
Suzanna lived with her parents and two older sisters. At the time of her refer-
ral there were concerns about her language development and play. Suzanna
would point to something she needed and vocalise rather than look. She would
take her mother’s hand and move her towards an object. There was some
situational understanding of words and she had used the odd single word.
There was very little sustained play but interest in peek-a-boo-type games
was beginning. She interacted well socially with her parents but there was a
lack of interest in other children. She had no sense of danger. Her con-
sultant noted a problem in object and context learning, alongside a lack 
of verbal attention. He considered that Suzanna’s problems fell within the
diagnostic categories of an autistic spectrum disorder (see Chapter 5 for back-
ground on autism).
Music therapy assessment
From the very ﬁrst session Suzanna demonstrated a lively curiosity in
music, developing over the assessment period into a clear preference for a
musical rather than a verbal environment. She was most responsive when
there was little pressure placed on her or any expectation for her to play. At
ﬁrst she played the instruments in short bursts needing to withdraw from
time to time to be close to her mother, to hide behind her or under a chair.
Her length of attention to the various sounds increased as the assessment
period evolved. She seemed to appreciate both the different qualities and tex-
tures of the sounds, sustaining bursts of playing on a variety of tuned and
untuned percussion instruments with support from the piano. One or two
sounds began to be shared interactively. She would make various high-pitched
and seemingly excited vocal sounds as she became more engaged. During
the very ﬁrst session her mother observed what she later described as

74
Part II Clinical chapters
Suzanna’s angry expression when she found it difﬁcult to hit a suspended
cymbal due to a lack of physical control. Her mother described this as a ‘bonus’
with the angry action being contained in an acceptable activity. This was the
ﬁrst time that she had seen Suzanna express an emotion in such a clear way.
How Suzanna used the different musical activities
and parameters
Suzanna quickly indicated her preferred musical activities: drum and 
cymbal-playing, playing the large tambour and brief excursions around the
room to explore the other instruments. At ﬁrst she would only use one or
two instruments. Over the weeks she tolerated the introduction of different
ones. Gradually her playing became increasingly reﬁned and sensitive to
changes. During the central period of the work she became adept at stop-
ping and starting and would initiate different ways of playing the instruments.
She imitated and initiated a range of tempi, levels of loudness and qualities 
of sounds, exploring quite subtle changes and contrasts. She imitated single
and repeated notes and short rhythmic patterns. She clearly demonstrated
a sensitivity and ﬂexibility within a musical environment. Towards the end
of the sessions there was more sense of a two-way reciprocal interaction in
the music.
A description of her music from a typical session
(observations taken from video)
This is a description of Session 30 at approximately the halfway stage in her
sessions. The session lasts for 30 minutes with approximately the ﬁrst half
being described here.
Preparation – one minute
Suzanna enters the room and immediately pushes a chair towards the drum and
cymbal. The instruments are placed in their usual position at the treble end of the
piano. She makes a series of high-pitched sounds as she organises the instruments.
Her mother encourages her to sit on the chair and I sit at the piano. I gently tap
the drum picking up the same tempo of her vocal sounds. I then vocalise in response
to some of her high-pitched sounds. She places a large tambour behind the chair,
lining up the instruments and chair, as is her custom. She takes a stick with her
left hand and points to me for the other stick, which she takes in her right. She
points to me to start playing the piano and to her mother to complete the setting-
up of the instruments.

Music therapy with a pre-school child
75
Opening music – meeting and ﬁrst sustained episode of engagement – 
two minutes
She gives her mother a stick. I play a short, inviting upward phrase in the tempo
of her vocalising (a steady 120 beats per minute). Suzanna taps back in a similar
tempo and with a similar phrase length. Holding the stick with her left hand she
increases the tempo on the drum. I match this. We return to the steady tempo.
This use of a steady pulse to contain and hold her is common to our music, Suzanna
making rhythmic excursions to and from this secure base. She looks towards her
mother who is mouthing sounds to her in the tempo of the drum playing. Suzanna
drops the stick and both her hands continue to ﬂap in what I read as her preferred
steady tempo. We play in this tempo and then explore faster music as she looks
towards her mother and vocalises with her. This feels like the ﬁrst sustained moment
of contact as she looks towards both her mother and me, moves with ﬂexibility
through different tempi and begins to combine vocalising with her drumming. This
ﬁrst sustained episode occurs at the peak of her level of excitement during these
opening moments.
Suzanna’s song – an episode of mixed levels of engagement – ﬁve minutes
I begin her greeting song at the slower tempo of 96 beats per minute. The song
provides a commentary for her drumming and introduces alternations of loud/soft
and fast/slow. She immediately adapts her tempo to suit the phrasing of the song
and her assured manner of playing indicates she knows this music. She anticipates
the changes of speed and loudness. She continues to vocalise with her mother. We
extend the material by improvising together. The music quietens and slows which
she picks up immediately with slower movements and softer playing.
She suddenly interrupts this calmer engaged period with a single loud hit on the
drum. I reply and stop playing. She laughs at this interruption. This feels like a moment
of real communication, a sharing in the meaning of the gesture she initiated. She
continues to play again and begins to move her feet in the tempo. The song devel-
ops with short phrases that increase and decrease both in loudness and tempo. She
hits the side of the drum – we have become accustomed to Suzanna exploring the
instruments in novel ways. She moves her mother’s hand in the tempo of the music.
The music slows down. In the quieter passages we see if she wants to change her
vocal sounds to a quieter ‘mm’ sound but she continues with excited ‘da’ sounds.
This whole episode is one of a reciprocal exchange and alternation of tempi and
levels of loudness. The material still derives from the song. Sometimes she drums
by herself; at other times she places her hand on top of her mother’s hand to con-
trol the speed of her mother’s drumming.

76
Part II Clinical chapters
Cymbal playing – engaged episode – three minutes
I gently touch the cymbal that stops the ﬂow of drumming and causes much 
laughter. Suzanna hits the cymbal followed by my immediate reply. This episode
then becomes characterised by fast alternating individual cymbal crashes and
streams of short patterns. The sound of the cymbal not only creates much laughter
and high-pitched vocal sounds but also leg and whole body movements. There is
also sustained looking at both adults. At times we play the cymbal together in her 
preferred tempo. Her mother is now sitting back from the instruments. Suzanna
plays and laughs and as her excitement increases she looks and vocalises towards
her mother. The pattern becomes established: play – look – laugh – my reply. She
is very still at the end of each long cymbal sound, as if she is waiting until the vibra-
tions end.
Cymbal – piano exchange – rather scattered episode – three minutes
I pass Suzanna the other stick and she continues playing the cymbal with altern-
ating hands. I return to the piano. The playing is very loud and sustained. She vocalises
with streams of ‘das’. She includes the drum in her playing. We are now 12 min-
utes into the session. She gives her mother a stick and begins to include her again
in the playing. She then passes this stick to me. I move back to the cymbal. She
brings back her idea of the single crash followed by a long pause (usually at least
ﬁve seconds). I join her in this exchange. There is much laughter again after my
reply.
Drum and cymbal-playing supported by piano and with or without vocal sounds
provide the musical frame for most of the rest of this session.
Main themes in the therapy
After the establishment of a sense of trust Suzanna’s music began to change
and develop. Her conﬁdence grew. Her mother began to observe connections
between shifts in the way she communicated in the music and her general
development outside of the sessions. The following observations within each
theme are placed alongside those made by her mother.
Development of trust and conﬁdence
During the ﬁrst period of sessions after the assessment Suzanna built up
sufﬁcient trust in the setting, the music and me in so far as she would enter
the room and begin to play immediately. There was soon less need to with-
draw and hide. It was important that we respected her need for sameness

Music therapy with a pre-school child
77
and familiarity. The instruments were set out each week in the same posi-
tion. If by any chance they were not she would quickly move them to where
they were usually positioned. The session was at the same time and day 
of the week. The session had a familiarity in the way preferred music and
activities were developed. Any new idea was framed within the more famil-
iar structures.
After a period of increased conﬁdence Suzanna would sometimes need 
to withdraw. These moments felt very ambivalent. It was as if somehow 
she was aware of how much contact she was making and needed time to
assimilate this new pattern. After such a period of consolidation she would
then return to her more exuberant self that had become typical of her
behaviour.
Her mother often commented on Suzanna’s developing trust and conﬁd-
ence. She adds:
Because of Suzanna’s afﬁnity with music she used it as a non-verbal means 
of contact with us. As her trust in Leslie and the setting grew so did her 
ability to use this ‘way’ to accept small changes and eventually to apply it 
outside this setting. She had not had many ‘successes’ in her previous
encounters with people until she used music as a form of communication.
She was then onto a ‘winner’.
Indirect communication through the instruments
During the early work Suzanna seemed to have only brief awareness of my
music or presence. When playing she would invariably take the lead and I
would adapt my playing to support and follow her musical ideas. Any sense
of joint communication would develop indirectly through the instruments.
She preferred to look at the instruments rather than directly at the two adults
in the room. This non-confrontational, indirect communication also helped
in assessing Suzanna’s limits to sensory and emotional stimulation. How much
sound could she tolerate? What kind of sounds, how many and for how long?
What were her preferred pitches and timbres? How much musical support
was acceptable and what kind? Suzanna would show us what she wanted
very clearly and the music was adapted accordingly. Her mother comments:
Suzanna was terriﬁed by loud, high-pitched noises (e.g. strimmers, vacuum clean-
ers and certain appliances). In her use of the instruments she discovered she
could control the sounds and therefore they were less frightening. This helped
ease her fears of the world.

78
Part II Clinical chapters
Development of more direct communication and 
eye contact
We would often play side by side to build up a sense of indirect commun-
ication. She began to feel comfortable playing on the same bass xylophone
or sitting on her mother’s lap while we both played the piano. Gradually,
as indirect communication was established through the instruments,
Suzanna would begin to give me tentative moments of eye contact. This 
happened mostly as long as I was at a distance and in my usual place at 
the piano. She began to tolerate me moving to different instruments as the
communications became more two-way and shared. The element of space
seemed very important for Suzanna and I was acutely aware of how a 
sudden change in position or movement could affect her and even create a
temporary withdrawal and break in the contact.
As her conﬁdence developed there were little signs that she was beginning
to allow me into her musical and internal world. Sometimes it would feel as
if she was testing me when she made sudden changes in her music. At other
times she would take on some of my musical material directly. By the time
of the session described above Suzanna was tolerating a session of 30 min-
utes, engaging in sustained episodes of direct musical communication with-
out any need to withdraw and avoid contact. Her mother commented that
it was important that music therapy provided the opportunity for Suzanna
to be in control of the amount of contact. She adds:
Suzanna used the instruments as a buffer in her contact with Leslie and myself.
As her conﬁdence in the situation increased so did her attempts at extended
eye contact and direct verbal communication.
Development of vocalisations
During the early work there were some context-based vocal sounds. Her mother
reported that there were more vocal sounds at home. One interesting occur-
rence was the way Suzanna began to open her mouth as if to produce a sound
and then not produce one. The use of Nordoff–Robbins reed horns stimu-
lated her to use her voice more conﬁdently. When she was most relaxed there
would be a wide range of vowel and consonant-based sounds. She would
make these sounds accompanied by a physical gesture, often a hand gesture.
These sounds clearly demonstrated her intention to communicate. She
would sing to me directly. She would also vocalise in ‘chorus’ with the adults.
We then observed a wide intonation and variety to her sounds: vowel and
consonant sounds, for example, ‘ah’, ‘ma’, ‘da’, ‘ah-da’ and ‘mm’. The
sounds increased in variety, length, frequency and range throughout the work.
Observing the development of her vocal sounds her mother comments:

Music therapy with a pre-school child
79
Suzanna’s ﬁrst verbal sound was ‘da’. She used it when she knew you wanted
a reply from her but her main use was Makaton and taking me to the item
she wanted. As her sessions progressed her range of two-letter sounds
increased. Also she realised that any sound was acceptable. There were no
wrongs or rights.
Development of turn-taking and reciprocal sharing
During the early sessions Suzanna led most of the joint activity. There were
the odd moments of more interactive play. There was also some isolated activ-
ity when I felt she did not want to share her music-making or be closely
involved in my music. To help in the development of a more reciprocal way
of interacting we developed a turn-taking activity. Firstly Suzanna and I would
sit on the ﬂoor around the large tambour. Suzanna would play and then be
invited to pass the stick for me to play my pattern. After a few weeks her
mother also took part. Suzanna began to tolerate sharing the activity with
two other people and passing the stick to her mother as well.
Music-making also provides opportunities for both synchronous and inter-
active play and Suzanna would lead both kinds with growing assurance. Her
mother took part in many of these turn-taking interactions and comments:
For her to allow me to ‘play’ with her was one of the highlights for me. As
she became more comfortable with the order of things to see her enjoyment
in sharing and turn-taking was a real turning point for all of us.
Development of planning
From the outset of the sessions Suzanna seemed to have a clear understanding
of the situation. She quickly began to make connections and would be clear
on what she wanted to play. She connected the appropriate stick for each
instrument. The overall shape of the session with a clear beginning, middle
and end seemed to help her relax. She was able to plan the order of activit-
ies within the overall structure, making each session very much her own.
The patterned-based nature of music seemed to appeal particularly to
Suzanna. During the early work she would be quite fascinated by the 
different ways both sounds and the instruments themselves could be put
together and linked in various sequences. She would happily explore up to
four different instruments being played in sequence.
Her memory for detail became more apparent as the sessions evolved. She
would recall musical aspects of a previous session, reintroducing instruments

80
Part II Clinical chapters
or re-exploring a speciﬁc musical parameter. She began to tolerate changes
of order. Her mother observed that:
Suzanna’s sense of order of things is very highly developed. She can only func-
tion when she knows the order of things and when that is in place then she
can feel free to experiment within those parameters. If she has control in the
situation as well then she is truly a happy person. Music therapy was an ideal
place for Suzanna’s needs.
Expression of emotions and needs
It was observable from the very beginning that music could provide a 
vehicle for Suzanna to express her emotions. By the end of the sessions she
was able to express a range of emotions from excited to calm. Music pro-
vided not only an access to her emotions but also a way of Suzanna being
able to express them in a communicative and contained setting. From quite
early on in the therapy Suzanna was able to make her needs felt, either by
gesture, pointing or, as the sessions progressed, by vocalising. She had clear
intentions of what she wanted to do during each session, how, when and
what she wanted to play and hear. She expressed these intentions clearly 
and she would always indicate when she had ﬁnished and wanted to leave.
It was very easy to understand her intentions in this musical environment.
Her mother witnessed the way Suzanna used the music to express her emo-
tions and communicate her needs and commented:
She never displayed emotions: happy, sad, angry. She was either OK or clearly
not OK. The ﬁrst time I saw Suzanna get angry was her trying to repeat the
sound from a cymbal that Leslie had just shown her. She was nearly three
and a half. The ﬁrst cuddle I ever received was during a session when the
viola was being played. The sounds of drums would excite her and the piano
would make her attentive.
Development of imaginary and symbolic play
An important development during the ﬁnal stages of the work was the use
of cuddly toys. Suzanna was beginning to express an interest for the ﬁrst
time in cuddly toys and we encouraged her to bring them to the sessions. A
toy fox and a favourite teddy bear were used as intermediary and softer objects.
They would be included in the music, Suzanna playing to them, watching

Music therapy with a pre-school child
81
and listening to their ‘responses’ as they also would be invited to play. The
cuddly toys would dance to the music, start and stop playing, jump up and
down to the music, play ‘hide and seek’ and sometimes fall to the ﬂoor. This
play also released much spontaneous laughter, a sense of fun and excitement.
This was a very positive step forward and her mother reported that such toys
were being incorporated into the rest of her play. She was beginning to under-
stand imaginary and symbolic play. About this developing use of imaginary
play her mother commented:
Her using the ‘fox’ puppet during a session was unintentional in that she never
had used it in that way before. She would just carry it around. Seeing the fox
hold the drumsticks to ‘play’ and seeing it jump when she banged on the drum
delighted Suzanna. She eventually used the fox to play small games with her
sisters. This was the ﬁrst attempt to play with her sisters.
Development of listening and a closer contact with 
her mother
The presence of a music therapy student who played the viola provided a
further opportunity for Suzanna to listen to music. She would often sit very
still while listening to the viola. The listening also enabled Suzanna to have
more moments of close contact with her mother. There were some moving
moments during the listening times when Suzanna would reach out and 
give her mother a cuddle, as mentioned by her mother above. Her mother
reported that these instances were very rare. The music had been a catalyst
for some of the ﬁrst spontaneous cuddles from Suzanna that she could recall.
She adds:
Suzanna did not like sitting on my lap, a cuddle, holding her hand, or even
touching her. My function (in the sessions) was to sit next to her and for her
to be able to hide behind me. As her sessions developed she allowed me to
take part in turn-taking, in visual contact in seeing my reaction to what was
happening and then in her responding to my response. To actually smile and
enjoy being part of a group activity was a delightful breakthrough for Suzanna.
Group work at a local pre-school 
Opportunity Group
During the ﬁnal stage of her sessions Suzanna also took part in a small group
music therapy session at a local Opportunity Group for pre-school children

82
Part II Clinical chapters
with special needs. She began to transfer some of the skills she had developed
in the individual sessions to the social context of a small group with her peers
and with a different therapist. Her parents also noted that the achievements
and skills developed in music therapy were being slowly transferred to other
situations. They made the overall comment:
We believe a great deal of Suzanna’s progress is due to the early application
of music therapy with reinforced support from her Opportunity Group. Music
therapy was the perfect vehicle for a child with no language and little social
awareness. The way it was presented to her accommodated her need of struc-
ture with ﬂexibility and control. To see our child ﬁnd a way to communicate
with us, a connection to us, in a way that pleased her was a blessing and a
privilege.
Reassessment
After a gap of almost eight months Suzanna attended for a short reassess-
ment session. It was clear that she remembered the setting, the overall struc-
ture of one of her typical sessions and me. She explored all the instruments
with assurance and a feeling of conﬁdence. She became very excited with the
loud sounds. An increase in sustained eye contact was apparent, as was her
desire for a direct, sustained and more open communication through the music.
She appeared very at ease in the setting and there were more sounds and
single words than before. Her exploration of moods ranged from the soft
and intimate, including a cuddle with her mother, to the loud and outgoing
that involved much laugher and apparent excitement.
Further music therapy for Suzanna
Suzanna’s parents wanted ‘access to weekly individual music therapy’ to be
included as an integral part of her Statement of Educational Needs. In pre-
paring reports for this statement her consultant paediatrician wrote:
Suzanna is under my care with an Autistic Spectrum Disorder. Music therapy
has proved crucial in further developing Suzanna’s interactions with others.
She shows preferential attention to music as opposed to verbal input. I con-
sider that Suzanna will require a high level of musical input as part of her 
curriculum in school, in order to continue her development. I would also 
consider that such input would best be in the form of speciﬁc music therapy,
in the ﬁrst instance.

Music therapy with a pre-school child
83
This request went to a tribunal before funding was agreed and the new ses-
sions could start. The family later moved to a different part of the country
where it was easier for music therapy to be made available. She had access
to a further period of music therapy at her new school.
CONCLUDING POINTS
We can note links between Suzanna’s story and the underlying premises listed
in the introduction and discussed elsewhere in this book. The sounds com-
ing from the music therapy room are described in words although no words
can do full justice to the richness of the musical interactions. It is clear that
Suzanna became deeply immersed in her musical worlds. We have glimpses
of her musical intelligence (Gardner 1985) and how she used music to help
herself in understanding the world. The comments from Suzanna’s mother
made links between the developing patterns in the music therapy process and
her world outside of the therapy room. The music clearly helped to deepen
the relationship between mother and child. This was demonstrated particu-
larly in the way Suzanna included her mother in the musical play (see
Oldﬁeld et al. 2001 and Warwick 1995 for further discussion of this steadily
growing trend of working with children and members of their families). 
For Suzanna we can conclude that music therapy provided a rich balance
between a valid experience in itself and one that touched many other areas
of her general development. It was a source of much pleasure yet at times
difﬁcult and discomforting. There was a sense of learning and of beauty, and
not only for Suzanna but also for her mother and all involved.

Chapter 5
‘Hullo object! I destroyed
you!’
Sandra Brown
My introduction to David was indirect. His classroom was across the hall-
way from the music therapy room in the school for children with autism where
I worked as music therapist. In sessions, I would often hear high-pitched squeal-
ing from outside and sometimes see a small struggling red-faced boy being
held by staff as he kicked and screamed. On speaking with David’s teachers,
I found them feeling frustrated and impotent: this ﬁve-year-old’s need for
control seemed total and the moment he was asked to take part in an activ-
ity he didn’t choose, or an interaction with another child thwarted him in
some way, he would disrupt the classroom, throwing over the sandpit and
water trays, ripping the curtains, screaming continuously in a high-pitched
squeal, and hitting and kicking any children or staff around.
Autism is a condition that affects children and adults cognitively, socially
and emotionally. Wing (1993) writes of the ‘triad of social impairments’ of
autism, with difﬁculties emerging in communication, participation in and under-
standing of interactional social cues, and symbolic and imaginative play. Baron-
Cohen also suggests an inherent lack of ‘theory of mind’ – the ability we
have to see things from another’s perspective (Baron-Cohen et al. 1993). These
impairments in social communication of necessity affect the response of 
others to the child, both in infancy and throughout development, further mul-
tiplying social deﬁcits. Furthermore, for the child with a disabling condition
such as autism, trying to make life manageable often involves developing
behaviour that seems even more dysfunctional, for example becoming obses-
sional, ritualistic and controlling. Jolliffe, who is autistic, writes:
Reality to an autistic person is a confusing interacting mass of events,
people, places, sounds and sights . . . A large part of my life is spent just
trying to work out the pattern behind everything. Set routines, times,
particular routes and rituals all help to get order into an unbearably 
chaotic life.
(Jolliffe et al. 1992: 16)
Thus the effect of the original deﬁcit or handicap can be greatly ampli-
ﬁed by a child’s reaction to and way of coping with their life experiences in

‘Hullo object! I destroyed you!’
85
relation to that handicap. Sinason refers to this as a ‘secondary handicap’,
writing:
In children and adults with an organic handicap there is genetic, chro-
mosomal or brain injury. This is real, measurable and incurable. How-
ever, the defensive use or abuse the individual makes of the primary
damage can sometimes be more powerful than the original handicap itself.
(Sinason 1992: 112)
This can mean that many autistic children and adults live their lives much
below their potential, hampered twice over by primary and secondary 
handicap. This certainly seemed to be the case for David, where, on top of
the confusion and upset he was experiencing in his day-to-day existence, 
his controlling behaviour was further denying him access to the special-
ised educational provision that could help him. Following discussion with
the school multidisciplinary team, therefore, it was agreed that he should 
be referred to music therapy, and David and I began working together the
following term.
As you will see in the following pages, therapy is a journey where you do
not know where you are going until you arrive. New directions can be thought
about and planned for but often lead into unexpected country. This journey
was devised – and continually revised – by both David and myself and each
of us contributed to the direction and manner we travelled. Within David’s
sessions, much of the clinical work took place within music but some did
not. As a music therapist trained originally in the Nordoff–Robbins tradi-
tion, it is in general within the improvisational musical relationship that I
hope to work to enable the freeing and developing of a child’s true poten-
tial. Nordoff and Robbins wrote of ‘the self-integrative experience’ of
music, with elements such as pulse, rhythm, tempo, melody, form, and emo-
tionality being ‘inherent in the relationship between man and music’
(Nordoff and Robbins 1977: 2). Because these elements live deeply in all of
us, a child can be motivated by music to move into a musical relationship
with another person. If that ‘child’s being is distorted or damaged (as the
result of pathology or emotional disturbance, for example) this will be
reﬂected in every aspect of her or his being – cognitively, psychologically,
physically, emotionally, musically’ (Brown 1994: 18). By working clinically
within the musical relationship, therefore, attending to musical limitations
and resistances as well as creative strengths, we can work simultaneously
towards healing many other aspects of the child’s being.
However, it is important to note that other factors in the therapy room
inﬂuence and are part of the therapeutic relationship, and each therapeutic
process also depends on how the client is able to and wants to work. How
this balance is addressed is unique to each therapist, depending on training
model, personal awareness and interests, as well as life and clinical experi-
ence. As you will see, it was not only his musical being that David brought

86
Part II Clinical chapters
into the therapeutic relationship, and my knowledge and experience of other
clinical models and literature helped to enrich my understanding and use-
fulness to David throughout our journey.
David and I worked together for two years, with the usual breaks for holi-
days between each school term. The work of each term, while continuing on
from the previous one, seems in retrospect to have had a particular focus or
emphasis in relation to the ongoing therapeutic development. I am therefore
going to describe the work under termly headings, although of course the
relationship between us was more ﬂuid and ‘through-composed’ than this
would imply.
TERM ONE: EXPLORATION
Session one
I go to fetch David from his classroom, and ﬁnd him squealing, back to the
wall, shoes off, standing in the window bay, where staff have resorted to cor-
ralling him behind chairs. He has been told he is coming to music therapy
and so accompanies me readily to the music therapy room, stopping only
to put on his shoes, which he retrieves from the dustbin. In the room, I show
him the instruments and explain he will come each week at this time for half
an hour. He chooses to play the small glockenspiel and plays each note con-
secutively from left to right and back again, in a two-note stop/start pattern.
I improvise on the piano, picking up the rhythm of this, matching the vol-
ume, speed and quality of his playing, singing ‘hullo’, as David plays on in
the left/right pattern.
After a minute or so, I begin to alter the speed, slowing down. David, how-
ever, continues in the same manner, showing no awareness of my change. 
I rejoin his speed and then, a little later, try moving faster. At this point 
he says ‘um’, stops playing and reads the letter names of the bars of the 
glockenspiel, saying ‘now let’s take where we count our ﬁngers – not a
singsong’. He counts the bars on the glockenspiel and begins to take them
off one at a time, asking me to instruct him to do this and then to tell him
how many bars are left each time. As I do this, I begin to create a song that
includes the counting, which has a very clear and predictable structure and
is very consonant in sound. David joins me in singing this, with very true pitch,
initially a little reluctantly but then with increasing sureness and pleasure.
At the end of each verse, he takes away a bar and then we sing the next
verse with the correct number of remaining bars. We sustain this song for
about three minutes, despite David several times rather anxiously telling me
to stop, then saying ‘you don’t sing the song yet’. I listen to and acknow-
ledge this but restart each time in order to gauge his response, and he joins
in again. However, he eventually stops me completely, saying he has to tell

‘Hullo object! I destroyed you!’
87
me his ‘news’. This involves lengthy and rather repetitive descriptions of 
yesterday’s shopping expedition with his father, and of how the switches 
work in the room, while switching them on and off. He speaks coherently,
but with some incorrect grammatical construction and word usage. I listen,
then explain that putting the switches on and off so continuously may be
dangerous, and suggest he explores playing the drum and cymbal. After some
demurring, he goes to the cymbal and spins it continuously ‘like a wheel on
the fairground’.
I begin to play the piano and he comes over, hand held out, palm vert-
ical, saying ‘that says stop – look, my hand held out’. I stop. He counts the
legs on the cymbal. I sing ‘three’ and he smiles and beats the cymbal. I play
again with him, matching his tempo and volume, but when I begin to get
louder, he cuts his volume immediately to very quiet, so that I ﬁnd myself
suddenly on my own, and drop mine also. He stops and asks the number 
of my house. I sing ‘213’, and he is amused and sings it also, playing the
cymbal in a rather erratic manner, which I reﬂect rhythmically but still within
a harmonic framework. David then picks up a reed horn from the table and
blows it intermittently. I match this and then begin to move towards a more
regular pulse. He immediately says ‘it’s goodbye now’. I ask if we should
sing goodbye; at ﬁrst, he says no, but then agrees, but ‘not the piano’, and
so I vocally improvise a simple goodbye song, which he joins in singing. On
the way back to the classroom, he asks if he will come again and I repeat
that he will come next week at the same time.
I have illustrated this ﬁrst session in detail in order to give you some idea
of the ﬂuidity and organic development of the process within the session –
initiation and response from both of us, each response resulting from a pre-
vious contribution, either in continuing the creative ﬂow, or in breaking away
from it. From this initial session, several things stand out: ﬁrstly, David’s
predilection for rather obsessional number-counting and cymbal-spinning,
both familiar activities with other autistic children, as is his resistance to being
involved in a mutual sharing in relationship. His occasional language prob-
lems also seem related to his autism, although he is obviously at the ‘high-
functioning’ end of the autistic continuum.
Secondly, his anxiety was clear when I displayed autonomy, for example
when I continued playing, or did not count exactly as he asked, and was
only relieved when he felt in charge again. He could rarely allow himself to
be held in the ‘creative now’ of the musical experience (Nordoff, cited in Aigen
1996: 10), withdrawing almost immediately from that mutual sharing and
living in the music. Thirdly, from a musical perspective, when I got faster,
David stopped playing and moved into counting; when I got slower, he 
didn’t register, playing on at the same speed; when I got louder, he immedi-
ately cut to a very soft dynamic and then stopped. However, when I created
a structured song he was able to join in, singing at pitch and in tempo, with
some pleasure. It seemed, therefore, that creative musical gestures from me

88
Part II Clinical chapters
could be taken up and enjoyed, albeit brieﬂy. However, the moment an unpre-
dictable or unplanned element came in, David would very quickly retreat
from it into the security of autistic rituals, and there were also areas where
he seemed oblivious to relationship at all.
My thoughts at this point were that David’s difﬁculties did not stem from
needing to be over-controlling but from feelings of lack of control – that 
this rigid control covered fear of inner and outer chaos, and from a very
tenuous grip on making sense of and managing the world around him, the
balance could be easily tipped and then David fell into an inner abyss of
uncontrollable frightening fragments. His anxiety when I did not stop play-
ing, with the sense of ‘if I give her an inch, she’ll take the world’, the reas-
surance and predictability of numbers and counting and the dangers of allowing
the needs of the musical relationship to sweep him along, all overpowered
the brief ﬂashes of spontaneous play and his real pleasure at engaging in the
music. I thought too of Winnicott, who writes of the painful necessity for a
child to move from experiencing the world from a position of omnipotence
to acknowledging others as ‘not-me’, separate, autonomous (Winnicott
1990). David’s inability to relinquish omnipotence seemed great, and led me
to reﬂect on the added difﬁculties of achieving this developmental stage for
children whose pathology already hinders them in conceptualising another’s
mind as different from their own, and for whom loss of control can be so
terrifying.
My overall therapeutic aims at this point, therefore, could be seen as twofold.
Firstly, the building of a relationship of trust, to enable a reduction in David’s
anxiety concerning loss of control, hopefully thus enabling exploration 
into the creative possibilities of mutual relationship; and secondly, working
for ﬂexibility and adaptability to the ‘in the moment’ needs of shared music-
making, for example in the areas of pulse, tempo and dynamic.
Continuing in term one
As we moved through the ﬁrst term of work, David often evinced great 
anxiety after even brief moments of shared experience and mutuality. In 
general, following where the music led could not be sustained and he would
immediately withdraw into the security of counting or telling me repetitively
about external happenings in his life. The points of shared musical experi-
ence that we did have were again often in song. Although he began to play
more extendedly, David’s instrumental playing continued to bear little rela-
tionship to mine, except where I matched and reﬂected the quality and tempo
of his playing, constantly ﬁtting and attuning myself to him.
I was struck by what a revolutionary idea this had seemed when Nordoff
and Robbins ﬁrst proposed it: rather than ignoring apparently non-
communicative behaviours:

‘Hullo object! I destroyed you!’
89
we take these manifestations of pathology, and through improvisations
. . . we meet the tempo of whatever the child is doing – the tempo of his
walking, of his headbanging, of his pacing up and down, of his rocking
. . . and we give this back to him in music, so that he has a new experi-
ence of what he does habitually.
(Nordoff 1976)
I reﬂected on how this is not just imitation or reinforcement of autistic
behaviours, but is much more reminiscent of Stern’s ‘affect attunement’, where
‘what is being matched is not the other person’s behaviour per se, but rather
some aspect of the behaviour that reﬂects the (child’s) feeling state’ (Stern
1985: 142). This kind of attunement between care-giver and infant plays ‘an
important role in the infant’s coming to recognise that internal feeling states
are forms of human experience that are shareable with other humans’ (Stern
1985: 151). This is clearly a vital starting point for a child such as David
with the social impairments of autism.
In the second session, David had introduced a Monster who stalked the
room, rushing up to eat me and roaring at me, who was kept controlled by
David switching the light off to make it go to sleep. As the term continued,
the description of the Monster’s activities became more and more destruc-
tive, with David informing me that it ‘eats all the ﬂowers and the curtains’,
‘will eat your piano’, ‘breaks all the trees up, you hear the big noise’. It felt
very much as though David was increasingly exploring the boundaries of the
room, both as to whether this destructive and ‘monstrous’ bit of himself could
be brought here, and whether the room – and I – could contain it, while
keeping us both safe. Here, the ability of music to be both structured and
free simultaneously was an essential therapeutic factor on many occasions.
David was able to join me from time to time in brief songs about the Monster.
He had also introduced the ‘Teddybears’ Picnic’ song. A rampaging Monster
was gradually able to be met and contained in this safely known music, with
David/Monster skipping rhythmically round the room as I played and sang,
then hiding and jumping out from behind the piano as ‘a big Monster sur-
prise’ at the end.
TERM TWO: CONTROL
On returning from the Christmas holidays, David’s control issues came more
and more ﬁrmly into the room. Musically, he increasingly limited my con-
tribution; as we would be about to start together, David would say ‘I don’t
know, Sandra – it’s not where you sing yet’; instruments were endlessly ‘not
quite ready’, and had to be adjusted. He would break off to open the top
lid of the piano and peer inside, asking about its workings, moving into 

90
Part II Clinical chapters
predictable discussions about his ‘news’. He also began to move instruments
behind the piano and play from there brieﬂy.
My activities became more and more proscribed. From deciding when I
should play, he moved to what I should play and then to stopping me from
playing at all. I felt increasingly that David was totally unable to relax in
case I took over, and that we were centrally dealing with his anxieties about
keeping control over his world. Clinically, I wanted to allow him space to
explore having this control, to build up his trust that I wouldn’t overwhelm
him, that I could – and would – keep the room safe in terms of personal
and instrumental safety in order to allow him to explore creatively. I felt
strongly that until he felt safe enough that his world, including me, wouldn’t
go out of his control the moment his vigilance wavered, he would not be
able to explore what spontaneous interaction and relationship could offer.
It felt vital clinically that I should not be drawn into exerting control for the
sake of having it, and not feel rendered impotent by David – the very dynamic
that he was caught in. Instead, I worked to step sideways into a separate
position, where I could maintain free choice to allow David to control 
the situation or not, depending on the clinical needs of the moment. I did
initiate playing, therefore, but stopped when told and accepted David’s
choice of instruments for me, waiting to see where his chosen route was 
taking us.
Throughout the term, I had been aware of a growing desire in David to
hurt me physically, as he mock-threatened me with beaters, squeezing my
ﬁngers ‘accidentally’. The Monster by now had materialised into a danger-
ous Cat that lived behind the piano, and which regularly came out squeal-
ing to scratch and eat me – the same squealing that I had heard him do in
the classroom. While physically containing David, I sang/spoke rhythmically
in a kind of rap about this dangerous ﬁerce Cat, how I could hear it wanted
to hurt and eat me and make loud angry noises, and that I was holding him
to keep us both safe. The containing and transforming qualities of musical
form and pulse were enormously important here, and I mulled over paral-
lels with what Bion describes as ‘maternal reverie’, where the mother takes
in and transforms the baby’s chaotic and potentially overwhelming feelings,
returning them to the child in a more manageable form (Bion 1962).
TERM THREE: THE DEVELOPING RELATIONSHIP
By the beginning of term three, David was more able to allow me to par-
ticipate musically, although still under strict control as to what or when to
play. He had allowed me a single glockenspiel bar in my hand with one small
beater, and I was able to play this, under strict ‘start–stop’ instruction. I obeyed,
closely matching and reﬂecting what he played in tempo, number of notes
and so on. David mainly played the piano and gradually entrusted more and

‘Hullo object! I destroyed you!’
91
more possibilities to me, risking that I wouldn’t take over. From the single
glockenspiel bar, sitting at a distance, I was given a cymbal, and a stick; then
a drum was added, I was moved closer to the piano and given two sticks.
All playing, however, was under strict control of the upraised hand. Never-
theless, as the term progressed I began to test playing or singing without being
invited, and this was gradually tolerated for longer periods of time. It
became very apparent, now that we could play together more, that David’s
playing showed no inﬂuence or apparent awareness of mine. He would play
piano always at the same speed, repeating the same pulse over and over. I
would join this speed, but any subsequent alterations I might offer in terms
of getting faster or slower he was oblivious to, continuing on and on, not
looking at or hearing me in any perceptible manner.
By now, David’s anxiety had diminished and he could allow me to play,
but no mutually interactive relationship was possible. I constantly strove to
help him break through the limitations he and his pathology had imposed
on him, working for variation of tempo and dynamic range in relation to
my playing. The ﬁrst indications of change came one session when David
for the ﬁrst time stopped playing a few beats after I did. The second was
when his playing became affected by what I did during our playing together
– not necessarily relating appropriately to changes I might introduce, but a
deﬁnite response, for example his pulse becoming erratic when I began to
go faster or slower. It felt like a thawing, as when an ice-shelf begins to crack
and break up, with change coming but as yet without new deﬁnition, and
this sense increased as the term went on.
Throughout the term, David continued to be the Cat behind the piano
for part of each session. He had also begun to request that I should be the
Cat, and increasingly locked me up behind the piano, with chairs to keep
me in, while he played boisterously on the piano, shouting commands to 
me and dropping things over the piano at me mock-threateningly. I was
reminded of the corralling of him that I had observed in the classroom. Again
here I worked to create a strong containing musical presence, using the back
of the piano as a drum, beating out rhythms and singing strongly in a rap-
style, drawing him into shared rhythmic interaction, while maintaining
boundaries concerning levels of destructiveness and damage.
As David and I sang about this dangerous Cat who could scratch and bite
and needed locked up, Tate’s paper ‘On Ego Development’ (Tate 1958) came
to mind. In this paper, Tate talks of John, a little boy who brings his des-
tructive self into the sessions in the form of a dangerous lion, who has to be
locked in a cage in order to contain him. Rereading this paper proved enor-
mously helpful and reassuring in containing me in my feelings of ‘unsure-
ness’ and not knowing in this section of work and I was struck by the parallels
in the present material. More recently, having read Sidoli’s paper on the use
of lion imagery in the analysis of two adult patients (Sidoli 1998), I became
aware of how this use of ‘wild cats’ to hold aggressive emotions for the child

92
Part II Clinical chapters
had occurred before in my therapy work, and mused on the connections of
this image with Jung’s idea of the collective unconscious and archetypal images.1
One day, when I was ‘locked up’ behind the piano, David came to the
side, saying ‘Oh, in the wind, an egg blowing – inside your cage’ – and came
in and lay by me. I sang about the egg, and then David called ‘Something’s
hatching – it’s cracking open, a baby kitten’s coming out’. I reﬂected this in
my singing and he ‘miaowed’ rather pitifully, and said ‘Who will be my
mother?’, holding on to me. This was repeated in the next session, where
again I used singing to hold and contain, rhythmically and melodically. The
following session, David came behind the piano beside me, enacting the 
egg-hatching again. He then told me in urgent tones to hold on to his feet
and not let go, and he began to strain and slide on his stomach to move out
of the ‘cage’ through the legs of the stool. He seemed not ready to do this,
reversing back in several times, trying again, still insisting I should hold his
feet and not let go. I sang about this, acknowledging his actions.
The next week David repeated this, calling ‘Hold tight’, and ‘Pull, pull’
as he strained to get out. Suddenly he launched himself away and through,
shouting ‘I’m gone!’ rushing round to play the piano very loudly and trium-
phantly. I joined in, drumming on the back of the piano and singing, cele-
brating with him. This was extraordinary to be part of, with a strong sense
of David using the sessions purposefully and seriously to do what he needed
to do in order to be ‘born’ and to begin to recognise us as two separate beings.
Before this, it seemed David had only two ways of being with me: either totally
omnipotently controlling of me, where I wasn’t allowed to have a mind or
will separate from him, or else wiping me out, as in where we played in par-
allel, with no acknowledgement of my existence at all. This ‘new birth’ seemed
to reﬂect developmentally what Winnicott describes as ‘the infant’s change
from being merged with the mother to being separate from her . . . to relat-
ing to her as separated and “not-me”’ (Winnicott 1990: 45) – a deﬁnite move
forward in the task of relinquishing omnipotence.
TERM FOUR: TOGETHER IN MUSICAL EXPERIENCE
What often amazes me is how the process of therapy is maintained and con-
tinues to develop during breaks, even of six or seven weeks. In the ﬁrst 
session of term four, after the summer holidays, David came in, arranged
himself a drumkit, and said ‘Hullo song ﬁrst? Right, start the piano!’ and
then, for the ﬁrst time ever, joined me in tempo, with a real feeling for phrase
shaping and style. After some minutes, I deliberately slowed down the pulse
and, after a few seconds’ delay, he hesitated in his playing and looked intently
1 Archetypal images: images containing very powerful emotional content, whose roots are found
in the shared unconscious of all human beings (see Jung 1968).

‘Hullo object! I destroyed you!’
93
at my hands. He then continued, joining me in the new slow tempo, mov-
ing his whole body in response to the music. It was a breath-holding
moment and I felt that paradoxically David’s growing awareness of me as
‘not-me’ had enabled the beginning of a true coming together for us. In the
rest of the session we improvised, with David listening and responding 
to pulse and musical changes. He also introduced songs he knew for us to
sing and play, with me being allowed to choose songs as well. Throughout
this, as well as singing, David created appropriate musical accompaniments
with a variety of instruments, and a great deal of enjoyment. This shared
instrumental and vocal work was to continue to blossom throughout the term.
It was an extraordinary shift and seemed the culmination of the work of the
preceding term.
In other ways, this was to be a difﬁcult term for David – his brother 
had begun school in a lower class, which he found very unsettling and chal-
lenging. I felt that both in and out of the sessions he was beginning to try
to come to terms with ‘the immense shock of the loss of omnipotence’
(Winnicott 1974: 83), and that a period of mourning for this had begun. This
was apparent in one particular session where, after playing and singing hullo
together, he stopped playing and said to me ‘you play’. This was the ﬁrst
time ever that I had been able to play alone and I felt this was an enormous
shift for the boy whose fear of loss of control initially meant he had to do
all the playing and me none at all. I did continue playing, and David sat,
looking and listening, with a sad and rather inward expression, occasionally
punctuating my playing with long held notes on the horn. A little later, he
wanted to play and sing the Beatles song ‘Yellow Submarine’ and directed
me to the percussion instruments, while he sat at the piano. After a few notes,
he stopped and turned to me, saying sadly, ‘I can’t play the piano – you 
play it’. We changed places, and then played and sang the song, with David
playing the percussion instruments with some panache. This felt deeply
signiﬁcant for him, ﬁrstly in the acknowledgement of his limitations, that he
couldn’t do or control everything, and secondly in the growing sense that
allowing the other to be separate and autonomous could potentially be
beneﬁcial and enriching.
Throughout the remainder of the term David and I explored and enjoyed
ways of being separate and together, playing on instruments simultaneously,
separately, swapping over, exploring concepts such as loud/soft, fast/slow,
high/low, widening David’s musical resources and his cognitive awareness
as well as his ability to enter into creative play in a shared and mutual 
space. Throughout this time, the Cat only appeared minimally and then 
disappeared altogether, as the work began to be contained totally in the 
musical relationship. Like Tate’s John, who could ultimately lead his Lion
safely on a string, David’s Cat was becoming more ‘tamed’, his feared and
overwhelming emotions brought to human proportions, able to be contained
and managed between us.

94
Part II Clinical chapters
TERM FIVE: STRUGGLE
Term four had felt like a consolidation of relationship, of David explor-
ing without anxiety and ﬁnding the pleasure of mutuality in relationship in
the music. By the end of the term, however, his control issues had begun to
come in again: he increasingly repositioned instruments, thereby curtailing
playing time, constantly going to the cupboard to get different ones. He also
became increasingly directive of my playing again, and now began to intro-
duce ‘Yellow Submarine’ to avoid and distract away from any spontaneous
shared improvisational material we might become involved in. Although his
control issues were re-emerging, David’s terror of losing control had now
gone and we had established a ﬂexible and interactive musical relationship.
I felt that he was now ready to tolerate increasing independent action from
me, where I might play as I felt appropriate, rather than necessarily as he
would like. In this, he would have to begin to acknowledge that what I did
I was motivated by choice, not his compulsion – that I was indeed separate
and ‘not-me’. This would be enormously important work for him, where he
could begin to manage the give and take of social relationship, to continue
the work in containing his frustration while allowing the other some free-
dom and needs of their own.
I therefore began to set limits on the constant re-choosing and moving of
instruments. David could make a suggestion, which I would implement for
the following week, but he had to work with what was set up in the room
on the day. He could play as he wished, within the boundaries of safety and
damage, but I began to choose what I did, for example which instrument I
played, how I played it, which beater, not always going with his desires.
Although I introduced this gradually, David found it very frustrating and
this was where the music itself was vital to reach in and motivate him to
want to join it. On one memorable occasion, we had begun by improvising
together very connectedly. David stopped in the middle of this and asked
for ‘Yellow Submarine’. I continued playing, saying ‘let’s stay with where
we are now’, and he seemed very put out, sitting turned away, holding 
the sticks up under his chin, determined not to play. However, the lilt of 
the song that developed about ‘Here is a boy with two sticks’ became too
irresistible and he joined in, at ﬁrst indirectly, still looking the other way 
while playing, but then with increasing commitment and enjoyment. A lit-
tle later, he remembered he shouldn’t be doing it and deliberately dropped
the sticks on the ﬂoor, with a ﬂourish, hanging upside down from his chair.
I continued with the song and within a minute he was again unable to resist
picking up one of the sticks from this position and joining in, playing the
chimes from below, still upside down.

‘Hullo object! I destroyed you!’
95
TERM SIX: ENDING
Term six came, with a continuation of these therapeutic issues and aims, and
with increasing acceptance and compromise being possible between us. We
were now covering a large creative area in the sessions – wide and varied
mood and emotional exploration, ebullient and calm instrumental playing,
many levels of tempo and dynamic; and melody and song, with quiet reﬂect-
ive free singing as well as known structured songs, all within a more mutual
relationship.
In his annual school review, David’s teacher noted that there had been a
great improvement in his behaviour and attitude, and that academically he
had made good progress. Although he still could be disruptive in groups, he
was now much more able to modify his behaviour. As always in schools 
and clinics there are children waiting to come for therapy and I felt we were
now approaching the point where David could go on developing within 
the continuing supportive environment of home and school. I therefore told
David just before half-term that there would be one more half-term and then
we would end music therapy – that when he came back in September, we
wouldn’t be meeting for music therapy again.
Endings inevitably bring with them all the issues related to death and part-
ing – mourning, feelings of loss, of anger, and therapeutic endings can bring
a ﬁnal return of earlier symptoms and difﬁculties to be addressed in the con-
text of ending the relationship. Here David would suffer the death of his
creative space with me, of our weekly music-making and relationship. He
had not chosen this; I had. This would inevitably touch into these very issues
of lack of control and omnipotence that we had been working with from the
beginning, and would be a testing time for him. In the ﬁnal weeks, David
would check at the beginning of each session how many were left. Four 
sessions from the end, he introduced a new theme. The session had begun
with him immediately starting singing ‘Yellow Submarine’. This felt like an
avoidance of a perhaps more emotionally risky improvisational relationship,
and so I played on, singing ‘No, no, no, time for hullo!’ David then began
a ‘spoken’ improvised song, which I supported on piano, in which he 
banished me to live in various unlikely objects such as toasters, light bulbs
and concrete mixers.
At the end of each verse, he would say ‘And then what will happen?’ I
would build and hold the musical tension – there would be a pause – and
then David would throw his hands in the air, enact an explosion and shout
gleefully ‘Dead Sandra!’ This would be repeated, with each killing-off
notched up – ‘Dead Sandra – eleven times!’ I felt like Tom in the Tom and
Jerry cartoon, outwitted, blown up, endlessly resurrected, only to be killed
off again. I thought of Winnicott writing of the need of the child to see the
object survive their destruction of it in fantasy in order ﬁnally to enable the
relinquishing of omnipotence (Winnicott 1974). I was also deeply struck by

96
Part II Clinical chapters
David’s understanding of my ‘separate mind’, as he tricked me time and again
into believing that this time I would be saved, only to deliver the coup de
grâce with consummate timing. No ‘theory of mind’ deﬁcit here!
In these ﬁnal sessions, I pondered on how far David had come. Two years
before, his need for omnipotent control was total with the unavoidable failure
of maintaining this precipitating terror and rage. His resultant destructive
and angry feelings could not be contained and were concretely acted out in
the room around him. Now he could bring these feelings into the arena of
creative play, both in music and words, and play them, enjoy them, manage
them within himself, without the need for destructive enactments. Winnicott
writes in terms of growth towards separation of the need for the child’s accep-
tance and recognition of the other’s ability to survive their destructiveness:
The subject says to the object: ‘I destroyed you’ and the object is there
to receive the communication. From now on the subject says ‘Hullo object!’
‘I destroyed you!’ ‘I love you.’ . . . Here fantasy begins for the individual.
(Winnicott 1974: 105)
This ﬁnding of the separation of fantasy and reality truly enabled David to
destroy me over and over again, within the sustaining ongoingness of the
creative musical relationship. He was now able to allow me to be a ‘not-me’,
a person other than him; and although he had had to face the frustrations
that I was out of his control, autonomous, independent, he was also now at
the beginning of another journey, one which leads towards the richness and
fulﬁlment that mutual relationship also brings.

Chapter 6
Music therapy with adults
with learning disabilities
Tessa Watson
INTRODUCTION
This chapter considers the ways in which people with learning disabilit-
ies can make use of music therapy. An outline is given of British social his-
tory of people with learning disabilities and the way their needs have been
perceived and met over the past few decades. The reasons why these clients
might be referred to a music therapist are discussed, and the process of ther-
apy is outlined. Music therapists have been working with people with learn-
ing disabilities since the inception of the profession, and a brief description
of this work, and related literature, is given. The author’s psychodynamic
approach to music therapy is described, and is illustrated by detailed case
material of work with a client who has profound and multiple learning 
disabilities.
LEARNING DISABILITIES – A HISTORY
Two clear deﬁnitions of learning disability come from the World Health organ-
isation (WHO) and the Department of Health. The WHO gives a medical
deﬁnition that is used for diagnosis:
medical retardation is a condition of arrested or incomplete develop-
ment of the mind, which is especially characterised by impairment 
of skills manifested during the developmental period, which contribute
to the overall level of intelligence, i.e. cognitive, language, motor and
social abilities (1992: 226).
The Department of Health, in its new White Paper ‘Valuing People’, sug-
gests that:
The presence of a low intelligence quotient, for example an IQ below 70,
is not, of itself, a sufﬁcient reason for deciding whether an individual

98
Part II Clinical chapters
should be provided with additional health and social care support. An
assessment of social functioning and communication skills should also
be taken into account when determining need. Many people with learn-
ing disabilities also have physical and/or sensory impairments (DOH 
2001: 14).
Historically in the UK, learning disabled people have been cared for either
by their families at home, or in institutional care. The numbers of learning
disabled children and adults with severe and profound learning disabilities
in England was estimated at 160 000 in 1999. Many of these clients live at
home. DOH ﬁgures show that 7000 of these people are cared for by the NHS
and 51 000 live in residential care (DOH 2001). Historically, these clients were
often very isolated from their communities, living or working together in insti-
tutional buildings and settings. In the past twenty years there has been a great
change in government and health services policy about disability in general,
including learning disability. Attitudes and language have changed radic-
ally. (Sinason 1992 gives an enlightening history of the terminology used 
to name this client group.) It is now considered that people with learning
disabilities can become full members of their local community (Whittaker
and McIntosh 2000).
Current thinking places an emphasis on helping clients to live satisfying,
full lives in their local community, and to have equal access to community
facilities (Mansell and Ericsson 1996). The government launch of the White
Paper aims to ensure high standards of service planning and care (Bailey 
and Cooper 1999). Although services have struggled to change their often
unwieldy structures to meet these new ideas, there is now frequently a char-
acteristic of partnership in the work that we undertake with our clients. Rather
than the client passively receiving treatment over which they have no
inﬂuence, clients and professionals are working together.
As a result of these changes in attitude and policy, more independent com-
munity living is often possible and desirable. This might mean that clients
own a house on a residential street, and have access to their chosen oppor-
tunities of everyday life. These opportunities may include making friends with
the neighbours, the postman and the local shopkeepers, and using the local
facilities including the pub, swimming pool and doctors’ surgery. Clients need
varying levels of support in order to access their community and to feel happy
with their lives, and research and consultation with clients shows that they
do not always feel their needs are met in the most appropriate or satisfac-
tory way (Murray et al. 1998).
Community teams were developed in the 1980s, often as a response to clients
moving from long-stay hospitals into the community. In 1987 there were 348
such teams in England (DOH 2001). Now these teams are the most usual
way that health professionals deliver care to clients living in their area. Many

Music therapy with adults with learning disabilities
99
teams are developing to become joint health and social services teams,
allowing professionals to work in multidisciplinary partnership with clients
to manage change and development for individuals.
If fulﬁlling community living for people with learning disabilities is to be
an actuality, not merely an aim, we must work with the realities and difﬁ-
culties that this integration brings. The King’s Fund notes that learning dis-
abled people need ‘special help, support, guidance and sometimes protection
to enable them to enjoy the beneﬁts of community life to the full’ (1980: 15).
This statement is borne out in the referrals that the arts therapists in the
author’s team receive, where ‘special help’ is often sought for difﬁculties with
communication, difﬁculties with self-expression, or problems with relating
with others. These referral reasons link with the ﬁndings of the London Learning
Disability Strategy Framework (DOH 2001) where it is suggested that spe-
cialist teams should address a variety of areas, including communication, 
sexuality and relationships, mental health and challenging behaviour.
Sines, considering the maintenance of ‘an ordinary life’, writes about the
importance of exploring feelings and past experiences (which may have been
suppressed and introjected), particularly those to do with loss, change and
bereavement; ‘such feelings are an essential part of life . . . time may be needed
for . . . sharing of feelings and emotions’ (1988: 45). MacKenzie et al. (2000)
talk about the importance of recognising and expressing emotion, and the
difﬁculty that clients with learning disabilities can have in this area.
Thinking such as this is in stark contrast to previous attitudes to people 
with learning disabilities, and is refreshing. Much work has been under-
taken by clinicians to help clients and staff to work together on the area of
emotional issues. Notably, the Tavistock Clinic in London and Harperbury
school have worked and written in this area (Nind and Hewett 1994, and
The Tavistock and Portman NHS Trust 2001). But Gardner and Smyly ﬁnd
that still they are ‘struck by the absence of good quality relationships for
some of our clients’ (1997: 26). It can be difﬁcult to ﬁnd ways to work with
our clients in the area of emotional relationships; music therapy provides a
useful resource.
A LITERATURE REVIEW
British music therapy has a long and interesting history in this clinical area.
Literature is available from the start of the profession in the UK in the 1960s,
and is fascinating reading. Reviewing the literature, it is clear that music ther-
apists have always been convinced of the efﬁcacy of their work with this client
group. Pioneers of the profession documented their work in journals and
newsletters; Wing states that even with the most disabled of her clients, ‘a
thin link of communication has been forged’ (1968: 8), and Alvin asserts that

100
Part II Clinical chapters
‘we know that music is an essentially ﬂexible means of communication
which can work at every mental, emotional and social level’ (1975: 2) and
that ‘it [music] can work at a primitive level of understanding and feelings’
(ibid.: 150). The clinical work described by these early authors is of a direct-
ive style, using well-known pre-composed songs and pieces.
In 1979, Odell documents the developing model of British music therapy,
when she writes that she worked ‘always from the spontaneous music he 
[the client] produced, taking up ideas in an improvisatory way, until he 
eventually made eye contact, and dialogue was possible’ (1979: 13). Music
therapists continued to develop their work in this ﬁeld. Clough (1992),
Cowan (1989), Gale (1989) and Ritchie (1991) all write in detail about case
work, describing the difﬁculties, approaches and theory behind their work.
British music therapy has developed to become, in March 1997, a state reg-
istered profession responsible to the Council of Professions Supplementary
to Medicine (CPSM 1997). Current characteristics of British music therapy
include the use of clinical improvisation. This is described by the Associa-
tion of Professional Music Therapists as ‘interactive music, spontaneously
created by the client and therapist . . . the shared use of sound’ (2000a).
A recent proliferation of books published in the area of the arts therapies
has produced some useful literature concerning music therapy in the ﬁeld of
learning disabilities. This literature includes Bunt’s overall picture of music
therapy (1994) and Heal Hughes’ readable descriptions of casework (1995).
Pavlicevic’s recent publications explore the nature of music therapy (1997)
and describe case work in detail (1999a). Wigram and De Backer (1999a)
provide an international overview. Despite the recent growth in literature,
there continues to be a lack of detailed writing about this client area. In the
research ﬁeld, only Hooper and Lindsay (1990), Oldﬁeld and Adams (1990),
Toolan and Coleman (1995) and Woodcock and Lawes (1995) have pub-
lished their work.
AN OVERVIEW
Music therapists ﬁrst began work in this area in large mental handicap 
hospitals, where clients often lived the whole of their adult lives. While work
continues in remaining hospitals, it is more usual now for music therapists
to be working in the community, perhaps, as in the author’s case, as part 
of a CTPLD (Community Team for People with Learning Disabilities).
Working in a team of this sort can allow for close multidisciplinary work
and sharing different perspectives and skills within the team. While for the
music therapist this teamworking may involve a struggle to speak a langu-
age that the team can understand (Pavlicevic 1997: 94), it is clear that the
music therapist’s integration in the team is productive. In addition to close
work with other professionals, liaison with the client’s main carers is often

Music therapy with adults with learning disabilities
101
desirable, both to share information, and to encourage carers to develop their
understanding of the client’s difﬁculties. The London Learning Disability
Strategy Group state that this is a strength of community teams (DOH 2001).
Liaison with professionals, parents and carers is undertaken with consider-
ation of issues of conﬁdentiality. This might mean discussing with the client
how much information can be shared, or talking generally with carers about
an area of concern without giving actual details of therapy work.
Clients are seen in music therapy across the range of disability. For ex-
ample, mildly learning disabled clients might come for therapy to address
speciﬁc difﬁculties in their independent community living, and might travel
to the session on their own. In contrast, severely learning disabled clients
might come for therapy to enable them to start to make emotional connec-
tions, and might need to be escorted to sessions by a carer. These examples
are given to show the diverse difﬁculties and situations that clients can experi-
ence. In the author’s team, group and individual assessment and treatment
work can be undertaken in the following areas:
•
long-term ongoing therapy with clients to address difﬁculties relating to
communication and emotional issues;
•
short-term therapy to support clients through periods of acute emotional
distress or to address a speciﬁc identiﬁed issue;
•
therapy with clients whose behaviour challenges staff and services;
•
therapy with clients who have a dual diagnosis of learning disabilities
and additional mental health problems.
The process of the music therapy referral may vary depending on the
resources, situation and clinical orientation of the team. In the author’s team,
clients are referred by the completion of a referral form to the arts therapies
department. The paper referral enables the therapist to gain important
information about the client and their needs, and is followed up with an 
initial appointment. This will usually consist of a home visit, where the 
therapist meets the client and perhaps a key worker or family member, to
give information about music therapy and discuss the referral further.
Following the initial appointment, a series of assessment sessions may be
offered. Assessment is a useful stage in the process of therapy, allowing 
both client and therapist to ﬁnd out if music therapy can be a helpful 
resource for the client. A set number of sessions will be offered (between 
5–8 weekly sessions) and following completion of the sessions, the ther-
apist will meet with the client and carers if appropriate to discuss the pro-
cess of assessment, particularly in relation to the reasons for referral.
Further treatment in a group or individual setting may then be offered. It
is important for treatment to be reviewed by the therapist at regular inter-
vals; maybe after each phase of treatment, or at the client’s multidisciplinary
review meetings.

102
Part II Clinical chapters
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
Music therapy is a specialised treatment that offers clients a way to 
address problems in their lives. Toolan and Coleman describe the music 
therapy structure as ‘a time of special attentiveness to meaning; in which 
anxieties, anger, sadness and thoughts, which may be of overwhelming 
proportions, can be held and contained by the therapist’ (1995: 18). The 
environment available is one ‘within which the patient may explore and 
deepen his experience of himself and his world’ (Steele 1988: 22). The 
therapist works with the client to address speciﬁc identiﬁed difﬁculties by
exploring the meaning in the relatedness that is created in the therapy 
session. Relatedness between the therapist and the client is established
through the medium of music; communication is carried in the client’s 
use of the musical instruments, therapeutic relationship and therapy space
(‘music essentially operates in the realm of analogue and metaphor, pro-
viding a transitional area of experience’ (Stewart 1996: 22) ). The musical
medium provides a non-verbal, accessible way for clients to engage in mean-
ingful therapeutic contact.
For clients with a learning disability, words are often a difﬁcult territory,
and the musical medium can be used to create an emotional and symbolic
landscape where thoughts and feelings can emerge into affective musical artic-
ulation and be safely explored and developed.
The author practises psychodynamic music therapy, using the funda-
mental approach (based on a mother/infant interaction model) taught on the
Roehampton postgraduate training course (Heal Hughes 1995; Sobey 1992;
Steele 1988, 1991; Stewart 1996; Woodcock 1987). For a detailed explana-
tion of this approach, see Sobey and Woodcock (1999). The author has 
developed this training further through the inﬂuences of personal therapy,
supervision and study. Particular psychotherapeutic theorists whose work 
has informed and enriched the author’s use of the psychodynamic music 
therapy framework include Stern, Klein, Winnicott and Bion. The approach
is modulated to provide an appropriate level of therapeutic intervention for
individual clients.
In order for the therapist to be a containing and thinking presence, 
able to receive (in the musical relatedness), all the conscious and unconsci-
ous projections, transferences and re-enactments that she will undoubtedly
encounter, an ability to think about the process of therapy (in and out of
the clinical session) is essential. Levinge speaks of this; ‘like the holding of
the infant by the mother, I discovered that I not only needed a physical space
to carry out the work, but also a space in my mind in which I could think
freely’ (1993: 220). The psychodynamic music therapy framework provides
a speciﬁc approach to thinking musically with clients. A central tenet is that
‘musical interactions and behaviour are a reﬂection of what is happening inter-
nally for the patient’ (Odell-Miller 1995: 86), or that ‘in the music-play of

Music therapy with adults with learning disabilities
103
the music therapy relationship, the therapist begins to become acquainted
with the internal landscape of the patient’ (Steele 1991).
The musical medium is used to establish relatedness between therapist and
client, and to communicate something of the client’s internal experience. The
therapist’s role is to enable, receive and digest these communications, and to
help the client to ﬁnd and explore their meaning. She does this in the sessions
through her musical, verbal and thinking processes and interventions. The
therapist will construct and develop a hypothesis about the therapeutic pro-
cess during and following sessions (in her clinical notes and supervision), and
will continue to develop these hypotheses in subsequent sessions. She works
to enable meaning to emerge and be understood, and patterns of relating to
be recongnised and modulated; thus change and progress may be possible
for the client.
There is a misconception that psychodynamic music therapy work
requires that words be spoken. In fact, much psychodynamic work is under-
taken without words. In this music therapy approach, the music and the words
are not separate; the psychodynamic approach does not exist only in the 
words, nor the music therapy approach only in the music; rather, they are
one approach. The results of the therapist’s thought about the dynamics of
the session can be conveyed in the therapist’s music as well as in words.
Pavlicevic describes this in terms of interpretation: ‘despite the interpreta-
tion being a solitary act that cannot be shared verbally with the client, the
therapist acts musically upon her “private” interpretation and seeks resonance
from the client’ (1997: 164). In the author’s clinical experience in this area,
words can be useful, and it is important that the therapist has her thoughts
available for use as words when appropriate.
However, the musical embodiment of the therapist’s thought is often the
most appropriate intervention. This is particularly germane when working
with learning disabled clients for whom verbal interaction may be inacces-
sible, confusing or threatening. Sinason’s statement that ‘however crippled
someone’s external functional intelligence might be, there still can be intact
a complex emotional structure and capacity’ (1992: 74) supports the value
of a means of emotional communication that is not dependent upon verbal
intellect or functional ability. Toolan and Coleman speak of this in speciﬁc
relation to music therapy, stating that ‘fundamental to the practice of music
therapy is the idea that the emotional world of patients is complex, full of
good and bad experiences and is intact, regardless of the degree of intellec-
tual difﬁculties or handicap’ (1995: 17).
THEORY INTO PRACTICE
Here the practicalities of the clinical session are described. Different
approaches in music therapy may consider different elements of the work in

104
Part II Clinical chapters
more detail and the following description represents the psychodynamic
approach of the author, who currently works in a community team in
London, England. A boundaried approach is used, with sessions taking place
on a weekly basis (occasionally twice a week), at the same time and in the
same place, and with preparation for breaks in therapy. This consistency of
approach encourages the regular contact of the sessions to be relied upon.
It also allows for the development of a reliable internal object. The music
therapy session is uninterrupted and, where possible, the room is soundproofed.
There are a variety of tuned and untuned percussion instruments available
for both the client and therapist to use. The length of the session is deter-
mined by the needs of the client; in the author’s work it is usual that indi-
vidual sessions are 45 minutes and group sessions 45–60 minutes.
The primary medium of the sessions is that of music, speciﬁcally, impro-
vised music, co-created by the therapist and client. Clinical improvisation is
a characteristic of British music therapy, and is used widely in work with
learning disabled clients. Rogers gives a clear description of the value of im-
provisation: ‘music therapy involves the use of free clinical improvisation
through which the therapist examines the relationship between herself and
the client, seeking to understand, reﬂect and interpret (either musically or
verbally) therapeutic issues that have particular relevance for the client. Clinical
improvisation within the therapeutic environment allows the inner emotional
world of the client to be examined and acknowledged’ (1993: 206).
The structure of each session may be different, and is determined by the
client’s use of the therapy space. Beginnings and endings of sessions may be
marked with a musical structure, marking the transition in and out of the
session in a non-verbal way. The client is then invited to use the instruments
with the therapist, in order to create jointly improvised pieces. While some
clients may be able to organise the use of the session time spontaneously,
others may need the therapist to take the responsibility of organising or struc-
turing the time. The therapist will be sensitive to these differences and will
structure the session accordingly. As the joint musical dialogue is created,
the client’s difﬁculties (the reasons for referral) can be explored in the con-
text of the dynamic musical relatedness. The therapist’s continual examina-
tion of the quality of this musical relatedness, and of her response to it, allows
the client’s communications to be held ﬁrmly at the focus of the session. When
appropriate, the music within the sessions may be taped and the therapist
and client may listen to the tape. It may also be appropriate, as discussed
previously, for the client and therapist to talk about the music, or for the
therapist to comment on aspects of the session.
After each session the therapist writes comprehensive clinical notes; these
will be consulted prior to the next session. The therapist constructs a
hypothesis about the work that is modiﬁed and developed following each
session. Work is reviewed in supervision, in discussion or review meetings
with the client, parents/carers or multidisciplinary team.

Music therapy with adults with learning disabilities
105
CLINICAL WORK
The approach described will now be illustrated by the examination of
extracts of a clinical case study. The case study is an assessment undertaken
with a severely learning disabled woman. The work took place in a resource
centre for people with learning disabilities, which is purpose-built and con-
sists of various well-designed and well-equipped clinical spaces. For music
therapy sessions, a medium-sized, airy room is used, and is set up with musi-
cal instruments, including a metallophone, windchime, cymbal and large drum,
and many small percussion instruments. The therapist’s cello and guitar are
also used. The music therapy service at this resource centre includes the pro-
vision of a small, weekly music therapy group for severely learning disabled
clients, and the work described is an assessment for this group.
The client was referred to the group in order to develop ways of relating,
and for help with self-expression. Having met with the client and key staff
in the client’s home to discuss the referral, a series of ﬁve weekly assessment
sessions were offered. Following this assessment, the client was offered a place
in the group and she has continued to attend the group on a weekly basis.
This clinical work was studied for a research project. While some details
of the research process will be given, extracts are used to explain clinical and
theoretical processes, and the research will not be reported in full. The pro-
ject aimed to explore the hypothesis that ‘music therapy interventions can
enable severely learning disabled adult clients to experience affective musi-
cal contact with the therapist’. Daniel Stern’s concept of affect attunement
was used to show the presence of affective communication and attunement
(Stern 1985). Stern’s work with mothers and infants led to the development
of this concept in answer to the question ‘how can you “get inside of ” other
people’s subjective experience and then let them know that you have arrived
there without using words?’ (1985: 138). He explored the stages of an inter-
subjective affective exchange, and considered that there were three different
stages to this communication. He developed the idea of different modalities
or channels of expression, such as a vocal phrase or an arm movement. 
The quality or property of affect is communicated by six types of behaviour
(absolute intensity, intensity contour, temporal beat, rhythm, duration and
shape) that are embodied in the communication between mother and baby.
In order to examine the research hypothesis, clinical music therapy ses-
sions were video-recorded, and documentation was developed in order to ana-
lyse the videotape. Three ﬁve-minute extracts from the ﬁrst, second and third
weeks of assessment were selected by the therapist and viewed by three music
therapists in order to identify the moments of connection and changes in con-
nection berween the client and therapist. This was done through the accu-
rate noting of tape counter numbers and the completion of documentation.
The documentation allowed the noting of different elements of connection:
musical, facial, gestural and body movement, and a feeling of meaningful

106
Part II Clinical chapters
connection not directly observable. These identiﬁed phases of connection were
then notated onto a manuscript (notation including the music of client and
therapist, the movement of the client and the therapist’s clinical notes), and
analysed. This research does not document a whole case study or aim to 
discuss aims and outcomes of therapy. Rather, this clinical material is con-
sidered in a phenomenological way to study what is happening in the con-
tact between therapist and client. A detailed description of segments from
each of the three extracts will be given, with comments about the process of
the work.
Segment 1
This segment of thirty seconds is taken from the ﬁrst assessment session.
While the therapist has been to the client’s house to introduce herself to the
client, it is the ﬁrst time that the therapist and client have met in the clinical
setting. There has been a musical greeting at the beginning of the session, and
now the therapist and client are embarking on the precarious and exciting
task of ﬁnding a way of being together in the music therapy situation. In the
research, the three viewers have noted this segment as one in which there
is connection between the client and therapist. At the point of description
(one minute and thirty-two seconds into the extract) the viewers have noted
a change in connection, as the client has begun to use her gestures deliber-
ately to inﬂuence the musical dialogue.
Figure 6.1 Commentary
The simplicity of the music echoes the tentative strand of contact that is being
created. The therapist is working slowly and sensitively, ensuring that she does
not overwhelm the client with her musical presence. She is musically reﬂect-
ing and conﬁrming the quality of relatedness. She has chosen to use ﬁrstly
her voice, and then the metallophone (an instrument with a gentle ringing
sound). Both have a warmth that is welcoming, and not intrusive; they invite
rather than demand a response. The client has appeared to hear and take in
these musical interventions, and is beginning to respond with a deliberate com-
munication of her own. She lifts her hand and opens it (1:38), and the ther-
apist responds with a musical phrase on the metallophone, reﬂecting the affective
quality of the client’s gesture. There is suddenly a different feeling; a stronger
connection has been made and is sustained.
The therapist’s notes in this session include the following: ‘D seemed bewil-
dered at ﬁrst – a new situation. Making contact at D’s pace felt important 

Figure 6.1 Segment 1.

108
Part II Clinical chapters
– important not to overwhelm D. Felt very important to wait for D, not
to rush in with sound. To create a space where she felt she could make a
connection’. In this intitial session the connection feels fragile and uncertain.
The therapist, working with the dynamics of the musical relating, is able to
process her experience of the contact and develop her therapeutic interventions
accordingly. A thinking and musical space is created where a direct connec-
tion is possible between the therapist and client.
Manuscript (see Figure 6.1)
The manuscript enables us to see how the relatedness develops. At 1:38 we
can see the movement of the client’s left hand, and the therapist’s clear response
to this deliberate gesture (on the metallophone). As the client continues to
move her hand, the therapist supports and acknowledges this movement with
a repeated note (1:41) and then holds and captures the quality of these move-
ments with a trill, as the client becomes still (1:44) by providing this holding
function in her music, she provides a relational and musical environment 
that the client can easily return to. This is indeed what happens at 1:47 with
the client making a number of clear hand movements, and initiating a phrase
of strongly imitative responses between client and therapist. In this segment,
the manuscript shows how the therapist’s music attunes cross-modally to the
client’s gestures by matching the intensity, timing and movement in physical
space of the client’s gesture.
Segment 2
This segment of one minute and nineteen seconds is taken from the second
assessment session.This segment starts at the very beginning of the session.
The therapist is building on the work in the ﬁrst session, and has chosen to
use the chime bars. This both enables the musical quality of the ﬁrst session
to be brought to mind, and allows the therapist to be nearer to the client.
She also uses her voice. As the session develops, both client and therapist
use their voices.
Figure 6.2 Commentary
Using her understanding of the relating in the previous sessions the therapist
has identiﬁed a need for a more prominent containing function and uses the

Figure 6.2 Segment 2.

Figure 6.2 Segment 2 cont.

Music therapy with adults with learning disabilities
111
chime bars to provide a musical framework or boundary for the client. 
She uses only two notes – again matching the minimal nature of the client’s
movements and sounds. The chime bars act to provide a musical holding or
container, within which the therapist and client explore with their voices. The
connection begins almost at once, as the client begins to use facial and vocal
communications. The therapist uses a vocal line to respond, and excitingly,
the client uses her own voice in response. Then follows a vocal dialogue of
short musical phrases, which feels strongly connected. As this segment con-
tinues, and the contact deepens and intensiﬁes, the client uses musical, facial
and gestural modalities, becoming very engaged in the dialogue.
Again the therapist uses her experience and understanding of their relat-
ing to develop the process of the session and her notes are useful to explore
this: ‘. . . ﬁnding out will the other respond . . . felt fragile, very detailed – tiny
sounds, need to respond to these delicate signals’. The contact feels very real,
and very fragile and vulnerable. She realises that D’s need to have control is
important: ‘felt D would make the choice whether to become involved; that
D would shut off if the contact was not as D wanted it.’ She uses the chime
bars to provide musical containment, which feels safe, and within this, follows
D, responding to vocal, facial and gestural modalities, giving her the control
that feels so important. She also notes ‘a feeling of delight in this connection’,
and uses this to inform her musical reponses.
Manuscript (see Figure 6.2)
Again, by following the manuscript, we can see the connections that are
described by the therapist. We see from 00:0 to 1:07 the way in which the
chime bars provide a continuous regular musical line that acts to contain the
musical relatedness. Once the vocal contact is securely established (at 1:13)
the chime bar line becomes more ﬂexible, perhaps where it is no longer needed
to be a rigid container. We can trace the client’s level of engagement on the
manuscript, which begins with a movement of the head (1:15), then a smile
(0:18), then vocal sounds (from 0:22) and leg movements (0:34 and 1:00). Later
in the extract (not shown) the client reaches towards the therapist as 
they sing together. The vocal dialogue, which the therapist describes as very
connected, can be traced between the parts of the therapist and client on
the musical staves. There is clearly musical connection that is seen in the 
rhythmic and harmonic matches beween the parts. The therapist’s written
notes add to the clinical picture by giving the emotional qualities present in
the relating.

112
Part II Clinical chapters
Segment 3
This segment of one minute in length is taken from the end of the third assess-
ment. It has felt difﬁcult for the client and therapist to get into contact with
each other; it is a hot and muggy day and the client seems to need to rest.
She has engaged with the therapist and has used the wind chime, but now
has slowly moved to rest her head comfortably on the side of her chair.
Figure 6.3 Commentary
The therapist is using her voice to reﬂect the different qualities and dynamic
feel of the session. She is available to the client for more active involvement
but does not demand this. She does not try to generate a different response
from the client, but accompanies her mood or ‘way of being’ in the session.
The therapist’s notes show how she works with the client’s silence: ‘thera-
pist’s music felt like a match of the quality of D’s silence and behaviour’. The
therapist responds to the client’s use of this part of the session and her own
experience of this. She creates a smooth vocal line, which cross-modally matches
the client’s physical posture (which is relaxed and still), and the calm com-
panionable quality of their relating. The client watches the therapist and is
held engaged throughout this part of the session. While the client is not using
the musical medium, the therapist is able to ‘voice’ the characteristics of the
connection betwen them, through her clinical improvisation.
Manuscript (see Figure 6.3)
We can see here the importance of documenting the use of modalities other
than music, particularly in this ﬁeld of work where the client may not have
the ability to use many instruments. We can see from the line drawing that
the client adopts a relaxed and open posture, resting her head on the chair
while she watches the therapist (3:12). The therapist’s vocal line is quite low
in pitch, and is slow, using long sustained notes and many pauses. This echoes
the stillness of the client and the increased musical space between them, while
maintaining a sense of movement – keeping the engaged quality alive and fur-
ther musical dialogue possible. The therapist’s musical line enables the client
to be still and silent (perhaps showing a need for more distance in the relat-
edness today) while still remaining engaged.

Figure 6.3 Segment 3.

114
Part II Clinical chapters
CONCLUSION
The presentation and description of these three short segments of clinical
material has shown the incredibly complex detail of the music therapy ses-
sion. The commentary accompanying each segment has illustrated the
author’s approach, giving an insight into the therapist’s clinical thinking, and
displaying, in the manuscript, the practical result of the clinical interventions.
The clinical descriptions have given examples of the way in which therapist
and client might be able to connect and begin a dialogue in the music ther-
apy situation. Where clients struggle to use language, the possibility of a dif-
ferent kind of dialogue is certainly valuable; more so when the medium of
communication has the ability to convey qualities of emotion and feeling.
Sinason’s words are apposite here: ‘there is meaning in the actions and feel-
ings of people with severe disabilties’ (Sinason 1992: 77). Music therapy is
one way in which these feelings and actions can be communicated and shared.

Chapter 7
Music therapy and neurology
Cathy Durham
INTRODUCTION
Many music therapists will encounter people with some brain damage in the
course of their work. This chapter is speciﬁcally concerned with people who
have led ‘normal’ lives but who have acquired brain damage later in life 
due either to trauma, stroke or degenerative neurological conditions such as
multiple sclerosis, Parkinson’s Disease or Huntington’s Disease. However, 
similar types of disabilities and the emotional distress that accompanies them
may be found within the context of different client groups; for example, 
people brain-damaged at birth within the ﬁeld of learning disabilities, and
those with Alzheimer’s Disease in the ‘older adult’ client group.
This chapter starts with a brief overview of different types of neuro-
disability, followed by a discussion of how music affects the brain and then
how some music therapy techniques may be used within a neurological con-
text. The three case studies that follow illuminate human dilemmas, which
have been worked with in music therapy.
NEURO-DISABILITY
Brain damage usually causes both physical and cognitive disability. With 
degenerative diseases, the onset may be slow and insidious or rapid. In
Huntingdon’s Disease (Magee 1995), Parkinson’s Disease (Erdonmez 1993)
and multiple sclerosis (Magee 1999) the process is irreversible and therefore
brings with it perhaps terrifying issues of life and death. With sudden trau-
matic injury or a stroke, an immediate and sometimes catastrophic change
occurs in a person’s life. Disabilities may be so extensive and severe that they
appear to radically alter pre-morbid personalities. Therefore the patient is
not the only casualty; family and friends suffer a loss of the person they once
knew. A cerebrovascular accident (CVA or stroke) is caused by bleeding within
the brain. Head trauma is caused mainly by road trafﬁc accidents but also
from falls, assaults or sporting injuries. Anoxic damage (oxygen starvation

116
Part II Clinical chapters
of the brain) causes multiple and complex disabilities because the brain 
damage is often global. Events leading up to the trauma may be distressing
in themselves. Anoxia has many causes: violent asphyxiation, heart attacks
or drowning. Infections such as meningitis and tumours account for some
severe cases of neuro-disability.
When a person has experienced brain injury, they are often referred to a
rehabilitation unit once medically stable. The emphasis there is on intensive
therapeutic input from a multidisciplinary team over a speciﬁc period, 
generally measured in months rather than years. Much of the work is based
on the model of neuroplasticity.1 Although in some cases extensive recovery
is possible for the patient, many people return to the community with com-
plex disabilities and are somehow expected to come to terms with their loss.
They may live in nursing homes with minimal therapeutic input. There is 
an urgent need for any kind of therapy service in the community that will
stimulate these individuals and attend to their feelings. There are many 
people who could be reached by music therapy.
HOW DOES MUSIC AFFECT THE BRAIN?
Our brains are enormously complex and despite recent research we are 
still at the stage of knowing little about how they work. In fact, some of the
research on music and brain function seems contradictory and it is difﬁcult
to make generalisations. Certainly people with similar types of traumatic brain
injury show unique patterns of response and behaviour, even allowing for
personality differences. Some isolated disabilities result in extraordinary and
fascinating behaviour as described in the collection of narrative case studies
by Oliver Sacks (1985). There is some evidence that some musical skills 
are anatomically located in speciﬁc sites in the brain, for example, timbre
discrimination within the right temporal lobe (Samson and Zatorre 1993).
However, there is little evidence for a ‘musical centre’ in the brain (Sloboda
1985: 265). Both Sloboda and Storr (Storr 1997: 37–39) summarise research
that identiﬁes the left and right hemispheres in the brain cortex as having
different general functions.2
A holistic view of brain function in relation to music may be helpful 
to music therapists. Pribham (1993) and his team at Stanford University 
have devised holoscapes; a way of representing three-dimensional images of
1 This provides evidence that the brain will respond to injury by reorganisation and adapta-
tion aimed at restoring function. Therefore rehabilitation requires extensive, repetitive, inten-
sive stimulation. New pathways in the brain can be manipulated and restructured.
2 The left hemisphere is specialised for more analytic tasks and the right for more global tasks;
or left for abstraction and right for empathy according to Storr (1997). Reverse this for left-
handed people.

Music therapy and neurology
117
brain function. Their ﬁndings suggest that musical response involves the whole
brain.3 This suggests that music could be a powerful clinical tool to use within
neuro-disability.
Musical structure can help us organise and retrieve information. One ex-
ample is the coordination of body movements to regular rhythmic structure,
as in the case of a woman with Parkinson’s Disease, who was unable to 
start walking until the therapist sang a strongly rhythmic song (Erdonmez
1993: 114). A woman I worked with who had anoxic brain damage was unable
to walk unless her attention was focused by singing a repetitive song she had
memorised. The sequence of manoeuvres required for tying laces was only
possible for an autistic boy when put into a song sequence (Nordoff and
Robbins 1971: 105). These same techniques could be used with anyone who
has difﬁculties remembering sequences. Reminiscence work with patients with
short-term memory problems shows that singing familiar songs helps access
long-term memory. Purdie’s work with a woman who could sing but not speak
demonstrates how music can be used to retrieve language by using different
neural pathways (Purdie and Baldwin 1994: 22 and see Simpson 2000). In con-
trast client and therapist may often explore ways in which music can be made
together without the therapist holding any ﬁxed expectations. Thinking
about the balance between the need for structure and ﬂexibility is helpful. Pre-
composed music provides familiarity and set structures that can be altered
by the therapist to suit the clinical need. Improvisation incorporating vari-
ous degrees of structure can be powerful and ﬂexible in an immediate way.
However, there are some common neurological problems that restrict a
creative response. A person with dyspraxia may have the intention to play
an instrument or sing but might be unable to plan and carry out this move-
ment. Sometimes as therapist I have been unable to ‘read’ the person’s inten-
tion and remain unaware of what is trying to be done. Heavier breathing is
often a sign that someone is trying hard to move. This needs really sensitive
understanding. Someone may have problems with initiating a movement, 
or a musical idea. The therapist providing a musical cue with a predictable
phrase ending can help someone predict and provide the last note or even
begin more continuous music. Others are disinhibited and ﬁnd it difﬁcult to
stop playing. The therapist might decide to intervene or distract at this point.
Perseveration is when a person is stuck in a repetitive sequence of behaviour
and may not be aware of this. The therapist may also get musically ‘stuck’.
I have found that a very clear strong musical challenge is needed if this 
happens. Some people choose to use their neurological disabilities cre-
atively. One man with clonus (tremor) in his left hand used this movement
to play rapid triplet beats on a cymbal. In case study two Tom uses his
wheelchair as an instrument.
3 This holistic response seems to be regulated by the frontal lobes of the brain. Pribham (1993)
suggests that music in itself is stored in the brain in some way.

118
Part II Clinical chapters
4 Clonus produces uncontrolled shaking in a particular body part. Sometimes it is possible to
stop a leg shaking in this way by leaning gently but ﬁrmly on the knee. The foot must be
ﬁrmly grounded.
CLINICAL EXAMPLES
The following case study shows how multidisciplinary work can be valuable
for someone with such severe disabilities. We will also discover that struc-
ture and consistency within a distraction-free environment are essential for
someone who is unable to attend selectively to noises in the external envir-
onment. These principles are adopted in the practice of sensory stimulation
on rehabilitation units.
Case study 1: ‘Simeon’
Simeon was a man in his sixties who had a severe stroke. He was admitted
to a neurological rehabilitation unit, then referred to music therapy by the
team. They were concerned by his agitation and lack of reaction to his imme-
diate environment. Simeon had apparently lost all sight but was likely to respond
to sound and touch. He could move his upper body only. He did not speak
and did not show any signs of understanding speech. My ﬁrst impression of
him was that he was never still. His left arm constantly wandered seemingly
without purpose. His breathing was laboured and he groaned on every out-
breath. His eyes were open but unfocused. It seemed as though the only thing
that prevented him from pushing himself from his wheelchair onto the ﬂoor
was a tray ﬁxed in front. Simeon’s knees shook4 and his torso and head rocked.
His inner state must have been one of turmoil and confusion.
When I ﬁrst met Simeon his breathing became a little more shallow and
rushed. This gave me some sense that he knew I was there. As I introduced
myself his left hand moved from the tray and touched his forehead brieﬂy
before returning, something I hadn’t seen before.
His relatives described him as a man who had enjoyed a relaxed lifestyle,
often drinking in bars until late with friends. He had loved dancing. I reﬂected,
with some irony, that he was still very physically active, in contrast to many
of the other patients on the unit who were either paralysed or moved in
slow motion. Perhaps together we could ﬁnd a way that he could relate his
body movements to his external environment in a meaningful way, as he used
to when dancing. This might also lead to the development of our relationship
and possibly help to reduce his inner confusion.
The occupational therapist, Sue, had discovered that Simeon had responded
most consistently to sound and touch in sensory tests. She had developed a

Music therapy and neurology
119
strong empathic relationship with Simeon. As she could advise on position-
ing of instruments and how to support Simeon physically, we decided to work
together for his assessment. Eventually we chose to work together through-
out the period of therapy, which lasted for seven months.
Faced with difﬁcult decisions about how to use music with Simeon I ﬁrst
focused on his breathing. Playing minor chords on the guitar, I sang his name
several times, synchronising the phrasing to coincide with his breathing. The
pitch of the ﬁrst note of each phrase was the same as the pitch he vocalised.
With excitement I noticed that as I sang his breathing slowed a little. After
four phrases his vocalising stopped altogether (see Figure 7.1). Was he 
listening? I continued a little and then brought the music to a close. After a
few seconds of tense silence, his vocalising began again and we repeated the
whole process. At the same time, Sue had been stroking his arm. This had
the effect of further calming him. As we continued to work together we 
began to synchronise the singing and stroking. Working with a co-therapist
was helpful with such a physically disabled man and I found our shared evalu-
ations after sessions supportive.
Simeon was often fatigued and had difﬁculty breathing. Coughing left him
exhausted. When this happened I felt the music needed to be rhythmically
solid and consistent, to help him regulate his breathing. Far from just trying
Figure 7.1 Synchronising of phrasing with Simeon’s breathing.

120
Part II Clinical chapters
to make communicative contact it began to feel that I was involved in the
responsibility of helping him to survive. This belief was reinforced by the obser-
vation that Simeon’s breathing altered in response to the music. It made me
feel almost omnipotent. I decided to increase the sessions to two per week,
unconsciously reinforcing this feeling. In the third session Simeon’s left hand
moved forward and touched the guitar that was balanced on his tray. With
a little physical support under his wrist from Sue he was able to move his
ﬁngers slightly against the guitar strings.
In the sessions that followed Simeon began to develop his purposeful 
reaching out to explore other instruments placed at the same point on the
tray. He reached out consistently whenever he heard a new sound and seemed
particularly motivated by a seed cluster and a beaded calabash. He could grasp
them but didn’t seem to know what to do next. However, with the guitar
Simeon always reached out as soon as the music had started and particularly
if the tempo was swung. At times Simeon would spontaneously tap the tray
or the side of his wheelchair during strongly rhythmic music I played, inﬂu-
encing the tempo and shaping the music more actively. His left knee jigged
more vigorously when the music contained a strong dynamic or pulse, con-
veying more of his emotional response.
As months passed, Simeon still showed no real indication of understand-
ing language. We had seen him touching his nose spontaneously, but when
asked by the speech therapist to do so, he did not. But in relation to the 
elements of music, Simeon did show more awareness. He was responding 
to pitch changes in the music by altering his own vocalisations to match my
singing more closely. He was responding to rhythmic change in the music by
shaking his knee or hand, and was inﬂuencing rhythmic change himself. He
identiﬁed instruments by sound alone and reached out to speciﬁc favourites.
He also responded to increases in loudness by deeper breathing and more
vigorous body movements.
Simeon’s responses to formal neuropsychological tests together with brain
scans showed he had extensive cognitive damage. Team members said that
it was unlikely that he was able to conceptualise what had happened to him,
so had minimal insight into his situation. Perhaps this was a blessing? How-
ever, I had reasons to suspect that Simeon may have felt a sense of loss and
this was addressed in one particular session. He was seized by a burst of rack-
ing coughing. As his face grew red I fearfully wondered if he was actually going
to survive this episode. Eventually it stopped. Simeon, exhausted, produced
huge tears that soundlessly coursed down his cheeks. This felt so right given
his circumstances. Sue and I also felt our own tears well up. We left Simeon’s

Music therapy and neurology
121
tears on his face so he could continue to feel them, eventually drying them
off as he was unable to hold a tissue. Then as he continued to weep I sang
some improvised music accompanied by the guitar which eventually brought
the session to a close (see Figure 7.2).
After this particular session Sue and I were glad we had shared grief with
Simeon. His contact with the outside world was so tenuous and crying together
was a very normal, human thing to do. It also showed us how hard it was
for us to stay with Simeon. Providing much of the musical material myself 
in Simeon’s sessions meant that I relied heavily on what I believed were 
counter-transference feelings to inform the music. This sometimes weighed
heavily on me and I needed to question whether these were Simeon’s feel-
ings or my own. It was helpful to explore these doubts in supervision. After
this Simeon’s agitation lessened for a couple of weeks and his vocalising became
more responsive and wide-ranging. We continued to see him twice a week
until he was discharged to a nursing home a month later, seeming to be more
at peace with himself.
Simeon was one of the few profoundly brain-injured people I have known
who actually managed to overtly express such grief. Yet for any non-verbal
person who has experienced devastating loss, music continues to be a vital
way of reaching and expressing those very deep feelings. In the following story,
by contrast, Tom was a verbally articulate man. Here, I used a different way
of thinking. This was inﬂuenced by the concept of primary and secondary 
handicap described by Valerie Sinason in relation to the ﬁeld of learning 
Figure 7.2 Improvised voice and guitar.

122
Part II Clinical chapters
disabilities (Sinason 1992: 7, 112). She identiﬁes primary handicap as result-
ing from organic damage. Secondary handicap, however, is the defensive use
or abuse the individual makes of the primary damage. This can be signiﬁcantly
more powerful than the primary handicap. With Tom, music therapy offered
some opportunities to combat the primary disability, such as encouraging use
of his left hand to reroute neural pathways, but the main focus of the work
was for him to discover what he felt about his own disabilities and how he
dealt with the reactions of other people.
Case study 2: ‘Tom’
When Tom was in his late twenties he had a head-on collision when driving
and sustained damage to the right side and also the frontal lobes of his brain.
Five years later, with Tom living in the family home, his parents sought music
therapy privately. Tom depended on a wheelchair most of the time. His use
of language was fairly unaffected by his accident but speech was slurred and
difﬁcult to understand because of poor physical articulation. Because the right
side of the brain was damaged his left side was weak and he had some per-
ceptual neglect on this side.5 He had frequent outbursts of temper, likely to
be explained by the frontal lobe damage, since it is this area that is known
to be related to inhibition of responses. This point clearly relates to Tom’s
primary handicap.
First meeting
Tom came with his sister who explained that they hoped music therapy would
allow Tom to begin to express some of his ‘locked-up’ feelings. She said he
needed opportunities to practise his speech in a safe setting with someone
he would get to know. Tom’s temper was seriously affecting his life. He would
often get angry and sometimes violent in social situations. Then people would
ask him to leave.
Alone, Tom himself was chatty, friendly and showed quite a developed sense
of humour. He tried a metallophone using a beater with his right hand. He
began with a regular pulse on seemingly random notes and then initiated short,
simple, rhythmic patterns within this. Tom seemed quite comfortable when
5 This meant that he simply did not notice objects to his left and was unaware of any stimu-
lus that side.

Music therapy and neurology
123
I played quietly with him in the same pulse at the piano but if I shifted the
pulse myself even slightly he ‘cut off’ by putting the beaters down. I soon
noted that this musical disconnecting occurred when I made any reference
to his future, a subject that must have been painful to him.
Early sessions
Tom agreed to try music therapy on a trial basis for six weeks.
In the ﬁrst session I set up a ‘kit’ of percussion instruments grouped together
on Tom’s right side so he could see and reach them easily. Tom was groggy
from anti-epileptic medication. He seemed a little overawed by the situation,
and dealt with this by spending ten minutes talking. He told me that he had
tried playing the piano at home after his ﬁrst visit, but that he had been ‘unsuc-
cessful’ compared to what I could do. I explained that I had been learning the
piano for many years, and that one might expect me to have more facility.
He agreed, then went on to say that he was ‘an expert at doing nothing’,
laughing in an exaggerated manner. It seemed that if he made a comment that
related to his sense of inadequacy, he immediately made light of it by joking.
Then he picked up a beater and played loudly a fairly universal rhythm I asso-
ciated with childhood and he associated with rugby matches (see Figure 7.3).
We explored a few minutes of turn-taking just using this rhythm, and Tom
tried out each instrument in the room to his right side. Later in the session
he fell asleep. I wondered how taxing it was for him to be touching on his
feelings in quite a new way.
The following week Tom talked about his accident. He could not re-
member it, he said, but ‘it sounded like a nightmare’. Immediately he started
testing boundaries by asking me to ‘sit on his knee’. I explained I wouldn’t
and why, and he immediately began beating the ‘rugby’ rhythm on a conga
drum forcibly. Soon, with some encouragement, he began to use the palm of
his weaker left hand to play the same drum. Then he raised his arm very high
and stung himself slightly when he brought it down on the drum, taking a
risk. Perhaps heartened by this he then asked to play the piano with me. He
insisted I played with one ﬁnger so that my music wouldn’t overwhelm his.
As he was leaving Tom went out of his way to say that he had not got annoyed
Figure 7.3 Tom’s ‘rugby’ rhythm.
seesee
see

124
Part II Clinical chapters
in the sessions so far. By contrast I felt that his feelings of anger had been
quite close to the surface. Somehow his contact with the instruments
brought up some feelings of inadequacy and fear of failure.
In following sessions strong characteristics emerged in Tom’s music. He
tested his strength and the durability of the instruments in each session. He
said ‘I could hit harder, but I don’t want to break your instruments’. I said I
thought the instruments were fairly durable; maybe they could stand being hit
harder. After this ‘permission’ he hit drums so hard with a beater in his right
hand that I did wonder if the skins would stand up to it; they did. He ended
sessions with the loud sustained blast on a reed horn. Later he began to pre-
tend to hit instruments very hard by raising the beater well over his head,
bringing it down hard with great control and stopping it centimetres in front
of the skin. He laughed if I misread his intent and played something very loud
on the piano when he just tapped. I became the one in the session who was
allowed to make the ‘mistake’ of playing dangerously loud. Tom put himself
in the position of being the one who contained his feelings. During im-
provisations when he played on the drum kit and I played the piano, I worked
hard at following and mirroring him, providing a sparser texture and a 
quieter dynamic than his. At ﬁrst his music was level in volume and speed
although after a few improvisations he introduced very slow crescendi.
Over the course of a 15-minute improvisation the volume and speed could
slowly creep up, led by Tom. Then he stopped with no warning, saying that
I was playing incredibly loud and that my playing was too aggressive. Although
much of the time Tom did not seem to be able to own his part of the 
uncontrolled feeling of the music, during turn-taking exchanges I was aware
that some of my piano-playing had an unusually harsh touch. I felt that I was 
acting out some of the anger that Tom was unable to express. To make 
this process more conscious I suggested to Tom that he played some of the
loudness himself. When he did this, and the instruments still didn’t break, Tom
laughed a lot and seemed to feel safer. At the end of the session he asked
me out of the blue whether I was married. Was this a sign he felt closer?
Exploring expression through loudness
Once the assessment was over Tom agreed to a further six months of ther-
apy, a period where Tom found it very difﬁcult to play music at all. He spent
most of the time telling me funny stories about his carers. Once I asked him
if he was feeling reluctant to play. He retorted very angrily that I was aggres-
sive, completely wrong, and now I’d be upset for being so wrong. Then he

Music therapy and neurology
125
picked up a beater and played the metallophone so quietly I could hardly hear;
the notes were random, slow moving and totally different in mood from the
predictable rhythms and pulse he generally chose. I joined him using one 
ﬁnger on the piano, and this music continued for some length of time (see
Figure 7.4). I felt that Tom was really asking me to listen and making me work
very hard not to drown him. This music seemed tentative; a side of Tom that
he’d not expressed before in music.
Then as the therapy was extended again, there began a time where he exper-
imented with enormous variety of volume. I had never heard anyone pro-
duce such a range of tone colours, note shapes and lengths on a single reed
horn. He also began to play on many different surfaces, including parts of 
his wheelchair. Tom used the carpet, the wall, his leg and his coffee cup as
resonating surfaces, and used the ends of beaters, his cigarette lighter, his
ﬁngers and his coffee cup on drum surfaces. Using the ‘rugby’ rhythm, leav-
ing the last two notes for me to play each time, he built up a huge collage
of sound. Then he grew tired of this rhythm, and said that he could go on
playing this same rhythm for ever, but that would be dull. I commented that
by using the same rhythm for weeks he had managed to express it creatively
in a very wide variety of ways. He said ‘I suppose so’ but the tangible evid-
ence of his improved self-esteem was his leaving me in a higher mood than
when he arrived. The times when Tom talked rather than played had less of
a feeling of avoidance now, being rather a natural resting point from the music.
Figure 7.4 Joint play: Tom and Cathy.
see
see
see
see
see
see
see
see
seesee
see

126
Part II Clinical chapters
Facing the trauma of his accident
In one session Tom began describing his week as having been a bit of a ‘crash,
bang, wallop’, demonstrating this on three instruments. He then related this
to his life, and said he would have preferred not to have had the ‘wallop’,
which meant his car crash. Immediately he picked up a cimbala6 and plectrum,
and played for about twenty minutes. I supported on the cello. Because of
the summer heat one of the cimbala strings began to go out of tune. Tom
focused on this note increasingly, so that he was choosing to be ‘out of key’
with the music. Eventually he almost threw the instrument down and said he
had ‘played it to death’. He was very quiet then until the end of the session.
The following week he mentioned an ex-girlfriend and an absent family mem-
ber. He also mentioned walking to the local off-licence. ‘It isn’t far away but
it’s a long way for me’. It seemed that Tom was beginning to want to talk
about things in his life that he had lost. At the same time, he seemed to be
seeking my support in the music more. Turn-taking on the ‘rugby’ rhythm
became a focus of exchange; he left much more space for me to play the last
two notes, and also he waited for me to play the initial cue several times. He
said ‘we work well as a team’. Tom also began to try to delay the ends of
the sessions, playing after I’d said it was time to ﬁnish, and told me several
times how much he enjoyed the sessions. He seemed quite emotionally needy
at this time.
In one session Tom was very tired, so I played some music for him to 
listen to. During this he fell asleep. I continued to play for about ten minutes,
and found myself playing a lullaby in three-four time as if he were a small
child. As I gradually began to enliven the beat, he woke up, and didn’t believe
me when I said he’d been asleep. He said to me ‘I expect you’re a mother,
aren’t you’. This seemed quite a change from his earlier ﬂirtatious self, who
tested boundaries by touching my knees with beaters and asking me if I was
married.
The following week Tom decided to describe in detail what had happened
in the accident, and the consequences. Infuriatingly, this was the only time
the privacy of the session was invaded at any point in the therapy. A work-
man came in, ignoring ‘session in progress’ signs. This did not put Tom off,
and he continued to talk. It helped, I think, that the man had entered the
room to Tom’s left side where Tom has neglect. Tom then said that anyone
else in his circumstances would be ‘very pissed off’, but that he wasn’t. ‘I 
6 Small harp from Eastern Europe.

Music therapy and neurology
127
generally work very hard at avoiding being pissed off’. This meant that we
could talk directly about how he did try to deal with his loss, and the fact
that he had a lot of anger stored up that generally surfaced when he was
under pressure. He talked about what happened when he lost his temper 
and how he had been excluded from some places. He said he was afraid 
of ‘losing it’ and he was always getting into trouble. Tom then decided to
‘have fun’ for the rest of the session, and spent most of his time playing the
swannee whistle and the ﬂexatone in quite an extreme way, laughing wildly.
The music was like Tom and Jerry cartoon music.
Three years later
Tom continues to attend music therapy. He has spent much of his time think-
ing about possible future relationships, but now concentrates more on the
good relationships he has now. His sense of humour helps him through the
setbacks he continues to face. He tends to sing more in improvisations, an
indication of trust and more personal self-expression. He enjoys playing 
virtuosic ﬂourishes on the piano with his right hand, and I enjoy playing with
them.
Within a medical framework, it could be said that Tom displays many traits
of someone who has experienced severe brain damage. He is often ‘disin-
hibited’ and ‘inappropriate’, has memory problems and impaired concentra-
tion. He has also been described as lacking insight and the ability to fully
conceptualise his situation. However, from my experience of my relationship
with him I believe that much of Tom’s ‘inappropriate’ anger stems from an
extremely painful sense of loss and a keen sensitivity to being patronised. He
has found it difﬁcult to articulate what it is that makes him angry, not from
misunderstanding the situation but because it is painful to acknowledge
where he is.
In Tom’s case, he has begun to look positively towards the future. For Frankie,
the situation was different because of the disease she had. ‘The future’ was
something that was not broached by either of us. Staying in the ‘here and
now’ of each session was extremely important, as it often is in a palliative
care setting.

128
Part II Clinical chapters
Case study 3: ‘Frankie’
Frankie was referred to music therapy when she left home to live in a 
nursing home. She was forty and had advanced multiple sclerosis. She was
wheelchair-bound, nearly blind with ataxic7 arm movements. Her son had sought
the referral through his GP. He felt that despite being confused, she was very
aware of having ‘lost’ her house. He was afraid she would deteriorate very
quickly now, although she had fought the illness for many years. However,
she enjoyed singing songs from the sixties, and often would seem happiest
when engaged in music in some way. From the way he spoke it was evident
that he was struggling with dignity to face the inevitable. His mother had a
deteriorating condition and the move to a nursing home was an admission
by both of them that she was unlikely to get well again.
When I ﬁrst met Frankie alone for an assessment session she appeared
cheerful, willing to participate in anything. She grabbed instruments ﬁrmly that
I held out for her to explore and immediately began shaking them rhythm-
ically. Her playing was strangely euphoric. I found myself playing strong Latin
rhythms with her when she played any shaking instrument. The music felt
almost brash in its vigour and almost out of control. The same thing occurred
when she tried the autoharp, playing it using a large plectrum she could grip.
She strummed all strings vigorously forcing the autoharp to vibrate so fully I
wondered if it would fall apart. This was partly due to the wide sideways
ataxic movement produced by her hands. However, by placing the autoharp
in front of her at a ﬁxed point across her midline, she could begin to reduce
the ataxia and focus her movements down. Frankie seemed cheered by the
session and declared ‘that was lovely’. She said ‘yes’ eagerly when I suggested
six more sessions before a mutual review. From discussion with other col-
leagues, clients with multiple sclerosis sometimes show exaggeration of per-
sonality in some way, almost larger than life. I thought Frankie had a kind of
exaggerated enthusiasm.
In early sessions, Frankie’s music was strongly coloured in mood, but with
very little variation. Her music was characterised in the following ways:
•
the pulse was ﬁxed rhythmically;
•
there was no dynamic variation;
•
her music would suddenly stop without warning as she tired;
•
she seemed only to play ‘cheerful’ music.
7 Ataxia involves wide shaking movements.

Music therapy and neurology
129
Frankie often responded to an improvisation with comments like ‘that was
really lovely’ but said little else. Her use of language seemed to be as
restricted in tone as the moods in the music. I wondered whether the 
sessions were helping her maintain an almost desperate sense of positive 
happiness in the face of her illness. Was this a necessary form of denial? I
was aware of the feeling I often had of the music being slightly unstable.
Therefore, I suggested playing in a more structured way. By alternating 
short phrases we were generally able to exchange phrases of equal lengths,
although soon Frankie still fell into a ﬁxed beating pattern seemingly obliv-
ious to my music. I would often interrupt this pattern in my music to try 
and contain the sense of ‘being out of control’. It felt like trying to stop 
some kind of runaway vehicle. Frankie usually seemed surprised brieﬂy but
then cheerfully resumed the exchange.
In the fourth session, by playing one simple note at a time, the situation
changed. Frankie began to explore different ways of playing her note; loud,
soft, delayed, resonant or muted. Her language also became more expres-
sive. She said ‘gentle’ or ‘strong’ while she played her note, reinforcing her
intention. She played one note on a slit drum, said ‘I don’t like that one, I
like this’ and swept the wind chimes. I said that the wind chimes sound con-
tinued but the slit drum note stopped short. ‘Yes’, she responded, ‘deadened’.
The symbolism was obvious. I asked her if it was important that notes ‘kept
going’. ‘Yes’, she said emphatically; ‘the music must be cheerful’. Notice the
connection between ‘keeping going’ and ‘cheerful’.
Frankie was keen on songs by Abba. She often asked to sing one particu-
lar song, ‘Money, money, money’. She couldn’t explain the personal signiﬁc-
ance; she lacked the words. However, the line ‘It’s a rich man’s world’ offered
certain possibilities; it was certainly not Frankie’s world. Despite forgetting
all previous sessions8 she always asked for the same song. I sometimes sug-
gested other Abba songs. If I said the ﬁrst word she would remember the
rest of the title. During the next ﬁve months, Frankie worked on remem-
bering these songs. At ﬁrst she was able to sing only the last word in a line
using the rest of the line as a cue, but later she was able to sing the ﬁrst
verse and chorus of four Abba songs. This was a real achievement, despite
increasing memory problems. Our exchanges became more varied in colour
and variety. Frankie was gaining ground in terms of her creativity despite a
deteriorating condition.
8 ‘Carryover’ from one session to the next is signiﬁcant when clients have serious memory 
problems.

130
Part II Clinical chapters
This was not to last. Frankie had a severe bout of ﬂu and missed six weeks
of therapy. She returned with increased ataxia and reduced concentration.
She began to ﬁxate on one song, and played no instruments. I felt dismayed;
it seemed that our work together had been lost. Was six weeks enough to
wipe it all out? Almost in despair I turned to the cello. Frankie sat in silence;
I played the melodies of our old songs. And then Frankie began to hum. Was
this a new connection between us in the music, or an echo of the old one?
For two months we continued in this vein, rarely speaking, but quietly making
music. Moods had changed; there was no more euphoria. It was important
just to be there alongside. I mourned the loss of the musical connection we
once had, maybe bearing just a tiny part of her own losses.
Working with anyone who is dying raises the question of when one actu-
ally stops therapy. Sometimes this is determined by external factors or the
death itself. In the end, with Frankie, she became quickly very ill and I spent
our last session together just playing the songs on the cello before saying
goodbye for the last time.
SUMMARY
The music therapist working in a neurological ﬁeld deals with a range of
musical and personal challenges. Because of the wide range of disabilities
caused by brain damage (primary handicap), both physical and cognitive,
there are very speciﬁc limitations imposed on a client’s creativity. Structure
or simplicity may aid the client to ﬁnd more freedom of expression and con-
trol within these constraints, the use of counter-transference feelings may inform
the music when most must be provided by the therapist. In all three case
studies, bereavement and loss were the dominant issues. The impact of sud-
den trauma on any life has far-reaching consequences for that person’s future
and for those who love them. A degenerative illness produces cumulative loss.
Other people’s reactions to these changes in circumstance combined with the
client’s own response often produce a very powerful secondary handicap. In
Tom’s case, music therapy is enabling him to become aware of his own reac-
tion to his situation, and also how he responds to others. For Frankie, the
cheerful mask she presented with each week in the early stages suddenly became
less necessary as she approached death.
There are few music therapists who work in this important and interest-
ing area. Specialist knowledge gained from working in a multidisciplinary
team can make the understanding of the primary handicap much clearer. Also
there are many community clients who could be seen by music therapists
who are sensitive to the possible secondary handicap. Regular supervision

Music therapy and neurology
131
helps and also the use of adapted instruments, possibly electronic, access-
ible to those with severe physical disabilities. The most important principles
of all are those of ﬂexibility and openness of heart and mind.
FURTHER MUSIC THERAPY READING
Read Usher (1998) and Magee’s response (1998) for a discussion of con-
sciousness and a review of the literature. Also read Aldridge (1996, 2000),
Bruscia (1991) and Ansdell (1995) for a variety of moving case studies.

Chapter 8
Music therapy in forensic
psychiatry: a case study with
musical commentary
Ann Sloboda and Richard Bolton
INTRODUCTION (Ann Sloboda and Richard Bolton)
Music therapists are generally required to be able to analyse their music as
part of their training. In the workplace their music takes place within a ther-
apeutic relationship. As such, their analysis tends to focus on those aspects
of the musical interaction that will inform both their own clinical judgement
and that of colleagues who are not trained to interpret musical phenomena.
These aspects typically comprise a patient’s interaction, communication and
self-expression, as indicated by the way a patient plays a musical instrument,
or musical parameters such as dynamics and articulation.
In contrast to this broad interpretation of the term ‘analysis’ (which might
in addition be informed by the theory and practice of psychoanalysis), the
history of composed music in Western culture has precipitated a parallel and
speciﬁc tradition of criticism and commentary, the most detailed and reveal-
ing of which is termed analysis (see survey by Bent and Pople 2001). Unlike
the majority of music therapy publications, which tend to deal with the para-
meters outlined in the preceding paragraph, the analysis of composed music
tends to look at the details of works as they relate to various levels of musi-
cal structure – phrase, section, movement or complete work. Whether these
analytical methods are valid in the discussion of music outside Western com-
posed art music is open to debate, but it is noticeable that the vast major-
ity of music therapy publications make little or no reference to this analytic
tradition. Exceptions include Lee (1989), who, in his detailed study of a ther-
apeutic improvisation, makes use of techniques developed by the German
musicologist Heinrich Schenker.
The aim of this chapter is to present the viewpoint of the therapist in 
two clinical examples alongside a separate discussion of the improvisations
written from a purely musicological perspective. By comparing these two 
discrete approaches to the same material, it is hoped that this chapter may
contribute to a greater understanding of the analytic, but often highly intu-
itive, processes involved in music therapy. The chapter will focus in detail

Music therapy in forensic psychiatry
133
on one case, using musical examples at the beginning and end of treatment
to illustrate the process. The case will be discussed therapeutically by the 
clinician, Ann Sloboda; and, the musical examples will be transcribed, with
an accompanying commentary, by Richard Bolton. It is hoped that this 
will provide a more detailed picture of the musical elements than is often
the case, and that conclusions may be drawn from a comparison of the two
perspectives.
The chapter is divided into several sections, which reﬂect its dual author-
ship. Following this jointly authored introduction to the chapter, Ann
Sloboda surveys the position of music therapy in the world of forensic psy-
chiatry. In the third section, the case material is presented and the musical
examples assessed from the viewpoint of the therapist. In the fourth part,
the two transcriptions are presented and discussed simply as pieces of music
by Richard Bolton. A ﬁnal section, again written jointly, aims to combine
and compare the two perspectives. The purpose of this dual mode of pre-
sentation is twofold: to see whether the analytic judgements of the therapist
are reﬂected or contradicted in the musicological analysis; and to demon-
strate the existence of empirical musical phenomena that may be used as 
analytical tools in music therapy.
MUSIC THERAPY IN FORENSIC PSYCHIATRY 
(Ann Sloboda)
In recent years there has been a rapid expansion in the ﬁeld of forensic 
psychiatry as a speciality within the wider ﬁeld of general psychiatry. Its 
practice is regulated as much by law and the criminal justice system as 
by medicine, and it necessarily deals with three different, but interrelated,
areas: society, crime and the offender. A succinct and thorough summary of
both political background and therapeutic issues is outlined by Welldon and
van Velsen (1996) in A Practical Guide to Forensic Psychotherapy. They view
the main aims of the forensic therapist as furthering the understanding of
the offender patient and providing suitable treatment programmes. Their 
book is a valuable introduction to psychotherapy with forensic patients 
and includes chapters on music therapy (Sloboda) and art therapy (Innes). 
It demonstrates the wide and complex range of professional approaches
involved in therapeutic work with this patient group. The parameters of psy-
chotherapy, as outlined here, can also be applied to music therapy: to try to
understand the psychopathology of the offender and to offer an opportun-
ity for the forensic patient to communicate something of their internal world.
My own orientation as a music therapist owes much to these ideas, while
recognising that in music therapy the relationship is developed through
music-making. Forensic psychotherapy theory emphasises the split between

134
Part II Clinical chapters
thought and action that affects many patients (Welldon and Van Velsen 1996:
81). In an earlier chapter (Sloboda 1996), I discussed how music, with its
capacity to be both concrete and symbolic, could be helpful in addressing
this split. The musical activity can be pure, spontaneous, impulsive action,
but can also (particularly if a recording is made) become an experience to
be reﬂected upon. This process is illustrated in the case material in this chap-
ter. It is also important to point out that music therapy can offer something
to psychiatric patients whose ability to reﬂect upon their emotional experi-
ences is very limited. In these circumstances music therapy is operating at a
pre-verbal level and owes much to the work of attachment theorists, most
notably Daniel Stern (1985). These theories are highly relevant to work in
forensic psychiatry, as the quality of forensic patients’ early attachments is
the subject of recent research (de Zulueta 1993).
While it may be argued that, for some patients, the majority of therapeutic
work has taken place in the musical relationship, verbal reﬂection can help
to shed some light on this process. Risk assessment is an important com-
ponent in the rehabilitation of mentally disordered offenders, in that pati-
ents are expected to have developed some insight into the fact that they have
an enduring mental illness, and some understanding of the relationship
between this illness and their offending behaviour. If no such insight or under-
standing is evident, a patient would often be considered too great a risk to
be discharged. This has some bearing on the role of the music therapists 
as all staff (including the arts therapists) have a responsibility to help the
forensic patient communicate verbally, as well as through the art medium,
about his or her mental state.
The proliferation of forensic psychiatric units has had an impact on all
the arts therapies. In particular, the number of music therapists working in
this ﬁeld has increased rapidly in recent years, compared with general psy-
chiatry, where music therapy services have remained static or have devel-
oped very slowly. There are even examples of music therapy posts in general
psychiatry ‘becoming forensic’ as long-stay hospitals close in the move
towards community provision, discharging all patients save those requiring
secure, locked facilities. At the time of writing these units now appear to be
the only ones where people remain as in-patients for a long time and where
there is sufﬁcient funding for a multidisciplinary team to do long-term ther-
apeutic and rehabilitative work.
As most acute psychiatric settings have such a rapid turnover of patients,
the music therapist is often working in an atmosphere of uncertainty, and
is routinely required to run ‘open’ groups with a continually shifting popu-
lation. (‘Open’ is the term used to describe group therapy sessions that offer
an open invitation to all patients from a particular ward/unit to attend. These
have been found to be appropriate in acute psychiatric settings, as most pati-
ents are either too unwell or in hospital for too short a period to commit
themselves to regular attendance.)

Music therapy in forensic psychiatry
135
It was with this background that I moved in 1994 from general psychia-
try to a Regional Secure Unit. This was largely motivated by a sense of frus-
tration that, while I could offer patients a musical, and often emotionally
powerful, experience, it was difﬁcult to develop this and make a signiﬁcant
contribution to their treatment. This was because their stay in hospital was
short and resources for follow-up scarce. At the time I began working in the
RSU it was comparatively rare for British music therapists to be working in
forensic units. Signiﬁcant forerunners were Helen Loth and Katie Santos who
had presented and published on the topic of music therapy work in secure
settings (Santos and Loth 1993; Loth 1996). My initial role was one of ses-
sional specialist, employed one day per week, attending a ward round to pick
up referrals, and working, individually at ﬁrst, with a few patients.
As recounted in a previous chapter (Sloboda 1996) there were striking 
differences between general and forensic psychiatry, in particular the staff/
patient ratios, and the nature of the contact with the multidisciplinary team.
In my general psychiatric work, the patients referred for music therapy were
unlikely to be undergoing any other type of individual therapy. As such the
music therapist functioned as the major therapist, who, in the case of out-
patients, held much of the responsibility for providing a supportive link with
the mental health services. In contrast, the forensic unit was well staffed by
highly skilled professionals of all disciplines offering intensive therapeutic input
to the patients. The case that follows is an example of this, with the patient
receiving regular mental state examinations from psychiatrists, individual 
psychotherapy from a psychologist, group art therapy, group occupational
therapy, and help with discharge and accommodation plans from a social
worker. With so much treatment already being offered, the music therapist’s
contribution needs to be carefully thought about to complement the rest of
the treatment, and to have a speciﬁc purpose.
The case in this chapter was one where music therapy, and improvisation
in particular, could help to address some of the emotional issues facing the
patient. For reasons of conﬁdentiality, biographical details in the case mat-
erial are kept to a minimum. The focus will be on the process of the thera-
peutic relationship. One reason for studying this case in particular was that
the patient was unusual in his level of musical accomplishment, his music
being harmonically more complex than is usual among music therapy
patients. This in itself was rare enough in my own 12-year career to warrant
further discussion. The issue of the musically accomplished patient in music
therapy has been raised at times by both colleagues and students as some-
thing of a problem for both patient and therapist. It is often argued that
patients skilled in a particular art form may ﬁnd it difﬁcult to use in a ther-
apeutic context. It can be hard for the patient to put aside technique that
has been painstakingly acquired through hours of work, to produce some-
thing discordant, messy or uncontrolled. The patient thus faces the signiﬁc-
ant challenge that music therapists experience in training: that of ‘freeing up’,

136
Part II Clinical chapters
putting aside their learned techniques in favour of more exploratory, 
perhaps even seemingly random paths. A musically skilled patient can also 
challenge the music therapist. I had become accustomed to helping those with
no prior training discover the potential of musical instruments, rather than
working with those who might challenge me musically.
Case study: David (Ann Sloboda)
David was a man in his early thirties, with diagnosis of paranoid schizophre-
nia, with whom I worked individually for eight months. When I met him, he
had been in the Regional Secure Unit for several years, admitted on the grounds
of diminished responsibility following his conviction for the manslaughter of
his girlfriend. He had been acutely psychotic at the time of his index offence,
believing that he and his girlfriend were divine beings of one mind, and that
she was party to a plan in which she would be killed and they would both
be reincarnated. By the time we met, David was making good progress in the
unit. He was already using individual verbal psychotherapy and taking part in
occupational therapy groups. His psychiatrist and psychotherapist considered
him capable of insight with much of his personality intact. While his psychotic
symptoms had been successfully controlled by medication, his mental state
was still considered fragile at times, and was carefully monitored by the 
clinical team. David had had some formal training in music, and was skilled in
both performance and composition. His main leisure interest was composing
modern dance music. He did this alone, using synthesisers, samplers and multi-
track recording equipment.
Our ﬁrst meeting was initiated by David, who approached me asking 
for piano lessons. I explained that I was not a piano teacher and that music
therapy sessions generally involved improvisation. He said that this was new
to him but was still interested in having some music therapy sessions. The
clinical team then made a formal referral for music therapy. They agreed that
the acquisition of skill was not an area of difﬁculty for David, but that emo-
tional expression was more of a problem. In his case, improvisation, with its
emphasis on spontaneity, would be more of a challenge than simply learning
to play the piano and could offer an opportunity for self-exploration.
The sessions
His ﬁrst sessions involved us playing pre-composed classical compositions that
he had brought along. In my view, this was his way of exerting the maximum
level of control over the musical interaction. The music we played had been

Music therapy in forensic psychiatry
137
selected and practised by him, whereas I had to sight-read, thereby enabling
him to test my musical skills while avoiding the possibility of anything un-
planned taking place. Music therapy provided a stark contrast to his recent
musical experience that had been solitary and highly controlled using elec-
tronic instruments. An interactive duet, where the players made no plans but
improvised freely on acoustic instruments was a much more immediate and
raw experience. David initially felt insecure and at a disadvantage. While I tried
to move the focus away from the product and on to the process (that is:
exploration, communication and self-expression), David was reluctant to try
any instrument on which he did not feel skilled. In the second session he was
prepared to improvise but only on his own electric guitar, rather than the
instruments in the therapy room.
An extract of our improvisation in that session has been transcribed (see
Figure 8.1). David played electric guitar, and I played the piano. We had agreed
in advance on the key of the piece, but nothing else. However, the music
quickly settled into a sequence of four chords that repeated over and over
again for about 20 minutes. Listening to the tape recording of the improvi-
sation, the features that were evident were as follows: within the improvi-
sation, a repetitive structure with a predictable pattern is established; within
this structure, there is nothing unexpected, such as discord, or sudden
changes in rhythm or mood. The speed and loudness level vary little through-
out the piece. The guitar and piano follow each other very closely; at times
they actually play the same notes, without looking at each other. The music
has a symbiotic quality; it is difﬁcult to tell the instruments apart, and there
is little sense of two different people.
My emotional experience of this piece was one of being drawn in to a sort
of musical merging, whereby there seemed to be very little differentiation
between patient and therapist. In the light of his case history (in which his
delusional material had featured a belief that he and his victim shared the same
mind), this particularly concerned me, and was discussed in supervision. The
music of the ﬁrst few sessions seemed to fall into similar repetitive patterns.
It was characterised by a hypnotic, trance-like quality, which avoided discord,
or changes of loudness or tempo. My role as a participant made it necessary
to record the improvisations, in order to listen to the music and attempt to
analyse the dynamics of the interaction in retrospect. I began to resist the
merging by consciously introducing contrasting elements into the music.
Generally, I encourage verbal reﬂection on the experience of improvising,
and talk about thoughts and feelings that may have arisen while playing. David
did not want to do this and difﬁculties arose when I suggested it. He said

138
Part II Clinical chapters
Figure 8.1 Extract 1: Second music therapy session.
see
see
see
see
see
see
see
see
see
see
see
see
see

Music therapy in forensic psychiatry
139
that he found my suggestions intrusive and began to be critical of my musi-
cal ability. In retrospect, I can see that my attempts to analyse what we were
doing signiﬁed to him that we were separate people, not ‘of one mind’, who
might have differing views about our experience. Having been initially idealised,
I was now denigrated by David. He was reluctant to acknowledge the ther-
apeutic aspects of our sessions, considering them ‘just music’; he felt that there
was no need to speak, as he talked in his psychotherapy sessions. It was help-
ful to me that his psychotherapist drew attention to the process of splitting
that was going on within the team. David began to miss sessions and said 
that he would only continue with music therapy if the focus was restricted
to musical improvisation. The sessions continued on this basis for several months.
Initially any discussion was purely factual, concerning technical aspects of the
music. Although I found this constraining, it also struck me that, in view of
his initial reluctance to improvise, this was a tremendously important mode
of expression for David. Orton highlights the challenging nature of impro-
visation: ‘(it) demands total involvement . . . one must be free to initiate ideas,
to hear and respond to the contributions of others. An accident or error can
be turned around and made musically meaningful’ (Orton 1992). As is the
case for so many patients whose ‘error’ has had such tragic consequences, 
it is not surprising that risk-taking had been experienced as dangerous and
something to be suppressed.
Now he was keen to improvise and take risks in a musical context, and
probably needed to experience it for a while before being able to hear my
thoughts about it. Later David told me that he had felt defensive and threat-
ened at this time. He considered that he was revealing much of himself through
his music and that discussing it further was too exposing. I realised that I may
have been too quick to offer analyses and interpretations. Gradually, he took
more risks, trying out instruments that he hadn’t played before. After about
six months, he began to discuss the dynamics of the musical relationship, for
example who had been taking the leading or supporting role and which of us
initiated changes in the music, such as getting louder or faster. He was, in
fact, beginning to reﬂect on the musical experience in the way that I had sug-
gested earlier, but at his own pace. He began to mention things that he found
difﬁcult, in particular the issue of ending a piece of music. This was true, as,
while I did not wish to impose a musical structure onto him, our improvisa-
tions would last for the entire session if I did not bring them to a close. We
discussed ways of bringing a piece to a close: fade out, stop suddenly, slow
down until reaching a halt, build up to a crescendo and so on. I certainly 

140
Part II Clinical chapters
considered these issues to have relevance beyond the musical sphere, both
in relation to his offence and in that he was prepared to think about the rela-
tionship between us. The link with his offence and the issue of ending was,
of course, that he had ended someone else’s life, a linkage maintained in 
the therapist’s mind rather than one which could be frankly discussed with
the patient. We experimented with ways he might decide to end a piece and
indicate this musically to me. He found this interesting but difﬁcult and realised
that all his own compositions did not actually ﬁnish, but just faded out.
He ﬁnished music therapy after eight months, when he started a full-time
college course as part of his rehabilitation (he was still an in-patient at this
time, and psychiatric and general clinical input was to continue up to and after
his discharge). The second extract (Figure 8.2) is from his ﬁnal session. I play
electric keyboard, while David is playing the piano. It is interesting to recall
that he had wanted me to teach him the piano. I resisted this, but had given
him a few ideas about how to use it.
In this piece David is much more conﬁdent, directing and determining the
musical structure rather than simply following me. His playing is now much
more exploratory, as he experiments with dissonance, tempo and loudness
levels. My role is much less prominent, sometimes elaborating his structure,
at other times just playing the occasional note. My function was that of a 
witness, rather than an equal participant, and the transcription of the music
reﬂects this. The music has some discord, but it is contained within a prim-
arily tonal structure. The piece ends clearly, with a cadence prepared by David,
as he plays increasingly slowly and quietly. The music is strikingly different 
in its intensity to that of the earlier extract. In this piece, David displays an
independent voice and identity in the music, greater conﬁdence and range of
emotional expression, and a willingness to explore and take risks.
Conclusions
Music therapy was useful in helping him tolerate differences and discord, and
in helping him learn to survive a relationship that went through a difﬁcult patch.
His typical way of relating to women was that of idealising them, merging with
them, and losing his own emotional identity. The music therapy relationship
helped him to ﬁnd a different way of being with a woman, that of being close
but individual. I consider any positive changes to be a result of staff working
closely together and being able to hold the counter-transference on a team
level. I am not attributing these changes to music therapy in isolation, but
rather making a case for music therapy within the multidisciplinary team.

Music therapy in forensic psychiatry
141
Figure 8.2 Extract 2: Final music therapy session after 8 months of work.
see
see
see
see
see
see
see
see
see
see
see
see
see
see

142
Part II Clinical chapters
Figure 8.2 cont.
see
seesee
see
see
see
see

Music therapy in forensic psychiatry
143
MUSICAL COMMENTARY (Richard Bolton)
Introduction
Improvisation can be deﬁned as the spontaneous creation of music in per-
formance. Whether the music belongs to a strictly deﬁned genre (such as jazz
or salsa) or avoids preset conditions entirely (as is the case in free impro-
visation), all improvisations share the feature that responsibility for the cre-
ative effect and value of the work lies with the performer. Although the pairing
of therapist and patient make for a specialised and unusual type of person-
nel, the difference between clinical and public improvisation is essentially one
of purpose and process rather than content.
The emphasis on improvisation in British music therapy practice can be
viewed as one aspect of a widespread revival of musical improvisation in
Western culture during the last century. This renaissance of the practice and
awareness of improvisation has been closely allied to the development of audio
recording technology, which has enabled performers from diverse backgrounds
to ingest, disseminate and even notate what had previously been a purely
local and aural skill, produced and received solely in vivo. The resulting canon
of ‘masterpiece’ recorded improvisations in such ﬁelds as jazz and blues have
in turn stimulated a considerable quantity of written commentary. Whether
as a result of the informal nature of the music itself, or due to the divergent
concerns of performers and academics, the vast majority of this writing has
taken the form of discography (that is, lists of recordings), pedagogy (that
is, ‘how-to’ manuals) or anecdotal historiography. Although some of this 
writing is extremely detailed, it seems that musical improvisation has largely
failed to stimulate an accompanying canon of in-depth criticism that in any
sense parallels the various approaches to music analysis that have charac-
terised the serious discussion of Western composed music.
The past 20 years have nevertheless seen a growing volume of academic
literature on the subject (surveyed in Bolton 1998, and including such sub-
stantial examples of analytic approaches to improvisation as Berliner 1992);
the ﬁeld is still relatively new, however, and the case for critical, verbal ana-
lysis of musical improvisation remains far from proven. Analysis of a music
therapy improvisation faces a further philosophical hurdle: that the music
has almost certainly not been performed with the intention of producing a
clearly deﬁned aesthetic object such as that represented by a commercial record-
ing. Without wishing to judge therapeutic improvisation by the yardstick of
published examples by acknowledged experts, some detailed examination of
the musical content of music therapy seems warranted by the fact that impro-
visation forms such a central component of much music therapy practice.
Aside from the fact that every genre of musical creativity is nowadays deemed
worthy of close critical scrutiny, it is possible that both music therapists 
and non-musicians involved in the therapeutic process might ﬁnd it useful

144
Part II Clinical chapters
to consider a detailed account of therapeutic improvisation from an object-
ive standpoint, if only to be able to tell whether such an approach could 
usefully support or contradict their original conclusions.
The transcriptions
The two transcribed improvisations (Figures 8.1 and 8.2) represent excerpts
from two separate performances. Both quite short, they have been extracted
by the therapist from two much longer clinical improvisations. The extracts
were chosen as being representative portions of the entire pieces. The ﬁrst 
is performed on piano and electric guitar; the second on piano and electric
keyboard. The patient plays guitar in the ﬁrst piece and piano in the second
piece; in general, this section of the article will not distinguish between these
respective identities, the aim being to view the pieces simply as two duet 
performances. The notated transcriptions can be thought of as a tertiary source.
The primary source, the actual performance, was experienced by only two
people, that is the performers. The secondary source, the recording from which
the transcription was made, has been heard by considerably more. Although
it is not possible to include this recording in this publication, the notated
version serves, in so far as this is possible, as an objective description of the
music upon which to base this discussion. While analytic criticism at any
detailed level would be difﬁcult, if not impossible, without some sort of 
transcription of this kind, it should be remembered that it is not universally
accepted that improvisation can be accurately or even usefully rendered in
Western notation (Bailey 1992).
The transcriptions upon which the following commentary is based are
included so that music readers can cross-check and form their own con-
clusions. Although some understanding of music theory is assumed, it is
intended that readers unwilling or unable to read music should nevertheless
be able to follow the critical argument. The following sections are termed
‘commentary’ rather than ‘analysis’ because their aim is to describe vari-
ous aspects of the musical events rather than investigate the music from a
speciﬁc analytical perspective.
Transcription 1 – commentary
The ﬁrst piece resembles a pop song in several respects: the chords, textures,
melodies and ﬁgurations are all reminiscent of an anodyne, post-1950s’ style
of pop music. The music hardly strays from the key of F major – indeed,
the guitar part has no distinct accidentals (although some dissonances are
created by the idiomatic ﬁnger-slides, notated by a straight line in the tran-
scription in bars 17 and 18). The piece falls into two halves, the second of
which starts at bar 9. Each half can be subdivided into two phrases, with
only the last phrase extending the characteristic four-bar boundary. The piano

Music therapy in forensic psychiatry
145
clearly dictates the harmonic movement which varies the following simple
chord progression: I (or VI)/ii/V/I. The ﬁnal phrase extends this formulaic
progression simply by lengthening the ii chord to two bars and the V chord
to three bars before the ﬁnal resolution. Typically, the I chord is decorated
with an added sixth, the ii and V chord with a ﬂattened seventh. The only
point of harmonic variety in the piece is in the approach to the ii chord. The
opening tonic sixth (bar 1) is replaced in bar 5 by an F# diminished chord
(a standard substitution for the VI chord). The doubling of the harmonic
rhythm in bar 9 (I and VI in ﬁrst inversion) gives a renewed sense of direc-
tion and purpose to the start of the second half, whereas the emphatic root
position V chord in bar 13 both disguises the predictable repetitiveness of
the chord sequence and justiﬁes the extended ﬁnal cadence.
The piano part largely comprises rolling arpeggios, a typical pop music
style of accompaniment. Syncopations such as the ties over the middle of
the bar serve to keep the rhythm ﬂuid rather than to provide any starting
impetus. The rhythm of the guitar melody is in the main rather four-square.
Only in the ﬁnal phrase (bars 13–20) do the rhythmic values include qua-
vers, a crotchet triplet and quaver syncopations. While the guitar-playing may
lack the ﬁnesse of expertise, the general style, akin to that of ‘West Coast’
rock guitar soloing of the mid-1960s, is well caught. It is worth noting how
readily incidental dissonances, such as the F#/F natural clashes in bars 5 and
9, or the G against the D7 chord in bar 13, are absorbed by the idiom. Also
signiﬁcant is the way in which the guitarist fashions two large-scale melodic
descents. The ﬁrst, from bar 2 to bar 8, descends through the interval of a
major ninth from D to C. Thereafter, the second half of the melodic line
climbs quite naturally to the climactic high G in bar 13; from here the line
descends, again through the range of a ninth, to the ﬁnal tonic.
Although the piece clearly displays certain elements of formal design, the
rolling piano arpeggios, the predominantly scalic movement of the guitar,
the static tonality and the formulaic phrase structure combine to form a sunny,
unrufﬂed and unchallenging improvisation.
Transcription 2 – commentary
The second piece is clearly very different in tone. The style of the music veers
between two contrasting areas: whereas the ﬁrst and last sections sound as
if they could have been written by a twentieth-century ‘classical’ composer
(for example Samuel Barber or Shostakovich), the two four-bar melodies that
constitute the most well-deﬁned section of the improvisation (bars 18ff.) sound
much more ‘pop’, with the characteristic aeolian modal harmony and delib-
erate 4/4 pacing of ‘progressive rock’ bands such as Pink Floyd. In some
ways, this piece is equally as one-dimensional as the ﬁrst, as the sustained
and sombre mood established at the start continues virtually unchanged for
the length of the piece. More speciﬁcally, the piano part consists of long bass

146
Part II Clinical chapters
notes and repeated crotchet chords (generally one harmony per bar) in the
right hand. The only exception to this is in bars 17–22, where the piano’s
right hand plays a single-line melody with predominantly quaver movement.
Also, as in the ﬁrst piece, it is the piano that appears to dictate the struc-
ture of the piece (even though it is the patient who is here playing the piano).
The keyboard line is at times so quiet that the listener’s focus is forced on
to the top line of the repeated piano chords. However, this is only one of a
number of textural strategies adopted by the keyboardist. At bars 6 and 13,
for instance, the keyboard seems to be reinforcing the piano’s top line, thereby
asserting its melodic role. At other times it seems to be interjecting, or com-
menting (bars 11, 15, 25 and 26) whereas it clearly ‘takes up the baton’ of
being the main melodic instrument as it is passed from the piano in bar 23.
The piece can be divided into four distinct sections. The ﬁrst ﬁve bars serve
as an introduction; after the pause at the end of bar 5, the second section
lasts until the piano’s right-hand melody begins at the end of bar 17. This
third section consists of a four-bar descending chord sequence played twice,
the second time featuring the keyboard as the main melodic instrument. The
coda, starting at bar 26, is dictated by the pianist both in terms of harmony
and tempo, with an accelerando in bar 31, followed by the rallentando in the
climactic bar 34. Apart from the ﬁnal cadence, several perfect cadences dur-
ing the piece establish a sense of the overall tonal centre of B (minor at 
bars 17/18 and 21/22; major at bars 25/26). However, much of the harmonic
movement in the ﬁrst and second parts has a sense of meandering along, as
if groping for a stable tonality. This impression is heightened by several pitch
clashes between the two performers (that is, A/A sharp in bar 11, D, D sharp
in bar 12). The piece thus reaches some very remote tonal areas in compar-
ison to the ﬁrst example. Furthest away from the prevailing key centre is the
second inversion chord of F major in bar 14, which leads to two distinctly
bitonal bars as the keyboardist tries to hang on in F major while the pianist
steers the piece back to B minor. The clash is absorbed quite easily here, as
the A, C and F naturals in the keyboard part can be heard as ‘blues’ deco-
rations of the pianist’s B minor. Some of this harmonic adventurousness may
be derived from the physical process of the left hand moving in one direc-
tion while the right hand proceeds in contrary motion (bars 12–15 in par-
ticular); elsewhere, the inner pedal E in bars 30–33 combines with a series
of suspensions and resolutions to create a sophisticated harmonic tension.
Structually, this piece starts (after the introduction) with what seems like
a long passage of ‘development’; the nearest the piece gets to a recognisable
‘theme’ is followed only by the climactic coda. Although this sequence of
material would be strange in a composition, following as it does no obvious
structural template, this type of form is by no means so unusual in free impro-
visation, where performers might dabble in several areas before ﬁnding one
that really seems to ‘work’. Dance music ‘mixes’, too, often precede a fully
scored (typically, vocal) ‘theme’ with a lengthy, deconstructed introduction.

Music therapy in forensic psychiatry
147
Comparison between transcriptions 1 and 2
Looking at the two pieces side by side, the inescapable conclusion is that
there is considerably more interaction between the performers in the second
improvisation. Although the piano dictates the musical character of both 
pieces, the single-line playing in the second is much more adventurous and
responsive, with a much wider range of approach than the somewhat one-
dimensional guitar-playing in the ﬁrst piece. This enables harmonic disson-
ance to occur and be resolved without upsetting the musical or structural
ﬂow of the improvisation. This is also reﬂected in the fact that the second
piece can accommodate much more tempo ﬂuctuation than the ﬁrst. The
respective histories of both jazz and classical music indicate that the move-
ment away from clear tonal references tends to be accompanied by a sim-
ilar loosening of adherence to an overt metrical pulse.
DISCUSSION (Ann Sloboda and Richard Bolton)
Improvisation – spontaneous music creation – is viewed in music therapy 
as an arena where anything can happen; it provides a forum for open dis-
cussion and an opportunity to discover something new through a sort of 
musical ‘free association’ analogous to that of the verbal psychoanalytic 
session. This kind of improvisation (sometimes characterised by the term 
‘associationist’, Clarke 1988: 1–26) typically presents a structure that better
resembles a narrative than a planned formal design. (Interestingly, patients
often liken therapeutic improvisations to ﬁlm music.) As such it might not
easily lend itself to analytic techniques devised to establish the relative struc-
tural unity of European compositions written between 1600 and 1900.
While the therapist is primarily interested in the musical interaction as a
series of events within a relationship, the musical analysis focuses on the com-
bined effect of these events and seeks to establish their effectiveness as musi-
cal performances. As the music therapist did not transcribe improvisations
(general clinical practice does not allow the time to do this), so any ana-
lysis that took place would be aural. The focus would be less on exactly 
which notes were played, or even which key, but more on the development
of the melodic and rhythmic material, and the place of imitation, repetition
and contrasts within the improvisations.
Given the quite discrete foci of the two ways of viewing the music, it is
signiﬁcant that the responses of the therapist are echoed in the musicolog-
ical description of the two performances. The ﬁrst piece, described in the 
musical analysis as ‘anodyne’, was experienced by the therapist as being 
pleasant, but saccharine and emotionally one-dimensional. In the case of 
a patient with a particularly traumatic recent history, such qualities in his
improvisation were experienced as exerting subtle control. Certain elements

148
Part II Clinical chapters
such as tension or aggression were excluded from the music, thus produc-
ing the bland quality remarked upon in the musical analysis.
The second and later of the two examples discussed displays aspects of
musical structure that could be termed more complex, varied, challenging
and, technically, more dissonant. Here, the therapist identiﬁed a broaden-
ing of the emotional expression in comparison to the ﬁrst example. This was
accompanied by a loosening of control on the part of the patient, allowing
unexpected events, such as musical discord, to occur. It also allowed the patient
to be more available for a genuine relationship with the therapist involving
more exploration, and ‘give and take’. These mirrored the changes seen in
the way the patient was able to use the music, but also in the way the rela-
tionship between patient and therapist had developed. The term ‘chal-
lenging’ in a musicological sense would refer to the challenge the music 
presented to the listener (or possibly a technical one to the performer), while
the same term used in a music therapy context suggests that difﬁcult issues
are being addressed rather than avoided or glossed over.
SUMMARY
It proved very useful for the music therapist to have a musical analysis of
the session material. It provided concrete evidence that supported her per-
ception of the music, developed intuitively from her own aural and experi-
ential perception of the music. From the analytic point of view, it is clear
that the nature of both pieces is dictated by only one of the participants (that
is, the patient, even though the therapist clearly inﬂuences the direction and
structure of the extracts). This one-sided emphasis in collective improvisa-
tion is unlikely to yield a genuinely satisfying aesthetic object. Nevertheless,
the commentary was able to identify speciﬁc aspects of the musical inter-
action that differentiated the two performances; as such it seems that these
aspects could support the therapist’s view of the nature of the changes that
had taken place in the patient.

Chapter 9
Musical narratives in music
therapy treatment for dementia
Helen Odell-Miller1
Stories are instruments of communication by their very form (Shah 1964).
They cannot be unravelled by ordinary methods alone. It is no use trying
to count words or correlate metaphors in a story with elevations in blood
pressure and hope to extract any meaning, but it is possible to under-
stand them as they are structured as a set of narratives. These narrat-
ives can be understood as being structured according to the rules of 
construction, as are musical compositions.
(Aldridge 1996: 101)
INTRODUCTION
This chapter aims to give a brief overview of current music therapy practice
in dementia, including some discussion of research questions, and focus-
ing on narrative aspects of the work. In particular, the importance of music
therapy and the continuation of narrative for people with dementia will be
illustrated by case material. The examples from practice will show how 
different aspects of narrative can be perceived in both the musical and the
verbal material, arising from clinical improvisations during music therapy
treatment. Research outcomes and evidence will be mentioned brieﬂy but the
focus of the chapter will be case-speciﬁc.
COGNITIVE AND NEUROLOGICAL
CONSIDERATIONS
The developmental and neurological aspects of understanding music therapy
are important, because it is now well known and well researched that when
1 The material for this chapter was previously presented as a short paper to the Annual Conference
of the Royal College of Psychiatrists in July 2001. We are grateful to Helen Odell-Miller for
agreeing at very short notice for the material to appear here.

150
Part II Clinical chapters
brain damage occurs, musical functioning often remains intact, and can be
the last faculty to deteriorate (Alajouanine 1948; Basso and Capitani 1985;
Gordon and Bogen 1974; Swartz et al. 1989; see discussion in Chapter 7).
Beatty et al. (1988) show ﬁndings that indicate that a broad range of com-
plex cognitive abilities may be preserved in patients with dementia of the
Alzheimer’s type who cannot perform simpler actions. People with prob-
able dementia of the Alzheimer’s type have demonstrated preserved skill 
at painting or piano-playing long after performance of other apparently 
simpler activities have seriously deteriorated (Crystal et al. 1989).
RESEARCH
In terms of an overview of outcome research and literature on music ther-
apy with this population the recent Cochrane updated review (Koger and
Brotons 2000) concluded that there has been insufﬁcient conclusive outcome
research in music therapy to justify it as a treatment for dementia. There
was a dearth of randomised controlled trials (RCTs). However, the report
also states ‘. . . the evidence available suggests that music therapy may be
beneﬁcial in treating or managing dementia symptoms . . .’. My particular
research in the 1980s, which looked at improvisation in music therapy in a
controlled trial with those suffering from dementia, led me to become inter-
ested in the ways in which developmental systems become reversed, the more
advanced the dementia becomes. Thus improvisation in music therapy,
involving spontaneous almost reﬂexive communicative interactions similar
to what Trevarthen (1993) calls ‘proto-conversation’ in his research with young
babies, is essential for those losing their cognitive functions. In summary the
research comparing talking therapy with improvisational music therapy in
a controlled trial showed the following:
1
Music therapy is associated with higher levels of engagement among 
participants than in reminiscence therapy, although this difference is not
a statistically signiﬁcant one.
2
Patients who have received music therapy show higher levels of engage-
ment half an hour after they have received music therapy than they show
at the same time on a different day, although this difference is not a
signiﬁcant one.
3
Patients show a signiﬁcantly higher level of engagement during music
therapy sessions when involved in this therapy regularly (weekly) than
they do when involved intermittently (for further discussion of this
research see Odell-Miller 1995).
A recent quite comprehensive overview of the music therapy research and
literature in this ﬁeld (Aldridge 2000) supports the view that music therapy

Musical narratives in music therapy treatment for dementia
151
is useful in managing and treating symptoms. This chapter does not attempt
to draw any signiﬁcant conclusions from the case material presented, other
than to illustrate how it is possible to use musical evidence for the existence
of a person’s ‘narrative’ long after their command of spoken language is 
damaged. I am using the term narrative in its broadest sense to refer to that
fundamental process whereby we understand and make ourselves understood.
MUSICAL NARRATIVE AND IMPROVISATION
Central to narrative expression is language and story telling that form the
basis of the therapeutic techniques of psychotherapy generally and drama
therapy speciﬁcally. In music therapy it is through the use of song and impro-
visation that the forgotten and innate narrative structures are encouraged
to ﬁnd expression. Indications for referral to music therapy do not depend
on the person having had a musical education. If anything it depends on the
person’s willingness to engage in a process of musical improvisation that, it
is argued, draws on a universal disposition to musicality which is more fun-
damental and enduring than spoken language. The rationale for using music
as an effective treatment in this way is described elsewhere (Odell-Miller 1995,
1997). I would like to present ﬁrstly some general comments on improvisa-
tion in music therapy before going on to describe a case presentation in some
detail. I will then return to discuss some of the theoretical issues involved.
Here is the way a music therapy group consisting of patients with Alzheimer’s
Disease might develop. Sessions involve encouraging interaction, awareness
and movement using instruments and voice, building improvisations from 
the sounds and music expressed by group members. At times, this involves
developing pre-composed material such as songs, or instrumental material, in
improvisations between different members in pairs, threes, small groupings,
or as a whole group. For example, if a member begins humming or beating
in a particular way, the therapist might listen and subsequently interact mus-
ically in order to build on this. The therapist identiﬁes the needs of the patients
by observing and getting to know patients as the treatment progresses and
the therapeutic relationships develop. Different types of musical interactions
are made according to assumptions about what would be helpful. For example,
when a patient who had previously shown withdrawn frightened behavi-
our begins to beat in a triplet-type rhythm quietly on a metallophone, the
therapist might see this as something that could be encouraged musically. This
might lead to the patient feeling more able to communicate in other ways.
The musical intervention by the therapist is, therefore, made in a way that
would help this.

152
Part II Clinical chapters
Those with dementia are often confused and express themselves in discon-
nected regressed speech. Verbal elements, as in ordinary ﬂuent speech and
language, are often missing. So music can be an alternative means of expres-
sion and communication because a combination of music and sound, often
improvised, provides a more accessible mode of communication for this 
population. This is important because music therapy concentrates on an 
expressive affect as well as talking and thinking. To reiterate the central 
point mentioned earlier: when other faculties deteriorate owing to frontal
lobe damage of the brain, a natural musical instinct often remains. What
the music therapist provides is a musical structure that both encourages 
and preserves this instinct from the deterioration of these other faculties.
Aldridge brings out this point in his discussion of rhythm.
A feature of her rhythmical playing was that in nearly all the sessions,
during the progress of an improvisation, the patient would let control
of the rhythmic pattern slip such that it became progressively imprecise,
losing both its form and liveliness. The initial impulse of her rhythmic
playing, which was clear and precise, gradually deteriorated as she lost
concentration and ability to persevere with the task in hand. However,
when the therapist offered an overall musical structure during the
course of the improvisation, the patient could regain her precision of
rhythm. It could well be that to sustain perception an overall rhythm-
ical structure is necessary, and it is this musical gestalt, that is the pos-
sibility of providing an overall organising structure of time, which fails
in Alzheimer’s disease (Aldridge 1996: 198).
Here, the therapist is acting like a musical narrator, offering an overall musi-
cal structure when the musical story is not complete. In order to further illus-
trate points raised above the following case study, which is also discussed in
Odell-Miller (1997), will be summarised.
Case study of M
M was 50 years old at the start of music therapy, which took place in a 
community setting where the multidisciplinary team was functioning well. He
was suffering from a particular form of dementia, Simultanagnosia. Areas that
integrate the visual ﬁeld were failing, which meant that M could see one thing,
but not many things at once, that is his ﬁeld of vision was affected. He ﬁrst
presented with a right parietal syndrome, therefore his non-verbal memory
was impaired, that is the construction of his visual-spacial memory was
affected. He could not distinguish shapes or remember other visual aspects,
while his verbal language and cognitive functioning were more intact at ﬁrst.
His life and work had been in the musical ﬁeld, and particularly in improvisation

Musical narratives in music therapy treatment for dementia
153
and composing. His musical memory remained fairly unimpaired although he
could not read written music at the time of referral. Thus his ability to impro-
vise was not very much impaired and he was able to return to a musical phrase
or section of music used at the beginning of a piece. It is noteworthy that
the notion of narrative is taken to mean a story in the least literal sense – a
musical story if you like – at that moment in time that reveals different aspects
of the person than are revealed in words. For example in M’s case there 
was a shared understanding of mood and also musical keys, demonstrating 
an implicative form of meaning or narrative about the musical discussion 
between two people, since these excerpts are all improvised, unplanned and
unfolding in that moment in time.
M was ﬁrst referred by the psychiatrist, who had a clearly deﬁned area of
work of music therapy in mind: ‘to help him work through some of the emo-
tional implications of his diagnosis’. In later letters, once the therapy had been
underway for several months, the psychiatrist wrote that he seemed often
depressed, with almost ‘too much insight into his condition’ but also that:
‘Although he has considerable difﬁculty expressing himself he did explain to
me that he found weekly music therapy visits very helpful, and his wife has
commented that he seems brighter after these sessions’. This was an ideal
use of music therapy. Two other key people involved were the community
psychiatric nurse, who visited weekly to help with practical coping strategies
and to provide support to M and his wife, and the psychologist’s interven-
tion that aimed at ‘trying to help the couple understand his neuropsycholo-
gical strengths and weaknesses’.
An assessment summary as follows illustrates the interrelationship between
music and words. After nearly three years of music therapy, he was quite
cognitively impaired and sometimes could not identify his wife. Here the idea
of musical narrative becomes important. His recognition of me perhaps
shows the power of the musical rapport in maintaining some sense of ori-
entation. He developed a rapport with me musically and often said during the
ﬁrst few months: ‘I feel this is so good for me – it’s just there, music is here
– you touch it and you get it’. He also began to improvise on his own between
sessions, something that he had no inclination to do when we ﬁrst met because
he was afraid of the piano. His words at this point: ‘It comes up to hit me’
and his anger towards me at this point seemed linked with his fear of the
piano and of losing his skills. It seemed that this fear subsided, the more 
our work developed, and that through improvising, he recognised a way of
expressing himself, in an area he felt relatively expert and conﬁdent. By this
I mean that long after he could hold a meaningful conversation, he could impro-
vise what seemed to be a meaningful improvisation.

154
Part II Clinical chapters
FURTHER THEORETICAL CONSIDERATIONS
The individual case example illustrated is with a professional musician,
which raises related issues such as how much his use of music can be seen
as intellectually driven rather than expressively or instinctually driven. I men-
tion this because the latter drives are usually the very reason why musical
narrative is signiﬁcant and beneﬁcial for people with Alzheimer’s Disease.
Aldridge (1996) suggests that the fundamentals of language are musical, and
prior to semantic and lexical functions in language development, a view
inﬂuenced by the ﬁndings of Stern (1985), Trevarthen (1993) and see Intro-
duction to Chapter 4. This work in the area of early development with babies
and young children supports the notion that it is in this spontaneous area
of the music therapy relationship that improvisation seems most powerful
in its way of producing and developing interaction and synchronicity where
it may have failed as a result of disability or illness.
Music therapists such as Bartram (1991) and Pavlicevic (1995a, b: and, 
in relation to work in adult psychiatry, see her 1989 paper written with
Trevarthen) have been inﬂuenced by Stern’s use of the term ‘vitality affects’
to describe mother–infant interactions, as these relate closely to musical ter-
minology such as rhythm, pitch and timbre. Trevarthen’s research shows that
the apparently irrational incoherent communications of babies are more pur-
poseful than originally thought. Socially constructed meaning is learned as
a result of inspiration that comes from early preverbal interactions. Shared
meanings even at three to four months old can be observed and concepts
that are more implicative in meaning. For example a child beginning to speak
is able to understand that the people in the same living space can have shared
meanings. Trevarthen uses the analogy of a musical duet to describe the 
above mechanism, where two performers seek harmony and counterpoint that 
is synchronised (improvised). They create together a piece of music that
becomes a coherent and satisfying narrative of feelings in a time structure
that they share in a whole piece. The idea of a narrative ‘ﬁt’ between mother
and baby that functions through such ‘proto-speech’ focuses on the links
between music and the human voice.
A collection of sounds, made up of the elements of pitch, loudness, 
duration and timbre, leads to the formation of music. Included in this is 
the importance of rhythmic, melodic and harmonic factors, as the previous
example shows, and have been discussed extensively by music therapists (for
example Alvin 1975; Bunt 1994; Bruscia 1987; Nordoff and Robbins 1971,
1977). Stages in the vocal development of the child have been researched 
by, among others, Moog (1976) – see summary in Sloboda (1985). These 
stages, including spontaneous movement to music and musical babble, are
not dependent upon musical training but are part of natural development.
They are signiﬁcant here, in supporting the rationale that when other facult-
ies deteriorate, a natural musical innate instinct often remains as shown in

Musical narratives in music therapy treatment for dementia
155
the case example. This can be useful not only in treatment but also in assess-
ment as Aldridge (1996) has shown, comparing convincingly music therapy
assessment tasks found in assessment systems for Alzheimer’s such as the
Mini Mental State, and points to links between musical and non-musical ways
of relating.
Emotional responses to music also seem to remain intact in spite of a 
deterioration of other cognitive faculties (see Juslin and Sloboda 2001 for a
comprehensive review of emotion and music). There is also a growing liter-
ature on the cultural and social signiﬁcance of music across the lifespan (for
example De Nora 2001).
CONCLUSION
To conclude, music therapy is particularly important for those who ﬁnd think-
ing difﬁcult, or communicating using words, but who want to express some-
thing. It is of particular beneﬁt for people with forms of dementia, such as
Alzheimer’s Disease, where severe frustration and depression can result
from deterioration in cognitive and verbal functioning. More research is clearly
needed in this ﬁeld but studies up to now show that musical narratives in
music therapy with people with dementia allow those without speech to tell
their stories in a less speciﬁc but metaphoric way. This can relieve some symp-
toms such as agitation and wandering. Relationships with others can be 
sustained in a way that is not always possible with words only.

This page intentionally left blank

POSTSCRIPT TO CLINICAL
CHAPTERS
Leslie Bunt and Sarah Hoskyns
In concluding this major section we return to the voices of our colleagues
ﬁrst heard in Chapter 3 to highlight some key points that have continued to
inspire them during their clinical practice.
Jean Eisler has been inﬂuenced by the notion of the ‘music child’ intro-
duced by Nordoff and Robbins.
There was the core belief in the music child in each person. One needed to learn
to really listen to the child’s sounds so as to grasp what this meant and how it
could be fostered. It was this basic tenet of the ‘music person’ reﬂecting the well
person. . . . You work to evoke, meet and develop the ‘music person’ together. 
The child can then believe in the relationship and begin to communicate and gain
the self-conﬁdence and self-belief needed to face whatever problems they have to
cope with.
Helen Odell-Miller stressed the inﬂuence of teamwork and learning from other
disciplines, music therapists and patients. This helped her in integrating psy-
choanalytical principles into her work.
One of the things I helped to develop in the late 1980s was a model not of psy-
chotherapy with music but of music therapy informed by psychoanalytic thinking -
the phrase we adopted was ‘psychoanalytically informed music therapy’. We took
the theory that seemed useful, particularly thinking about transference and counter-
transference. The music didn’t get lost and also one was using a model that worked
in reality for people who were often quite disturbed suffering from schizophrenia
or manic depression and who wouldn’t normally get taken on for traditional ana-
lytic psychotherapy. All through the 1980s that was what I was trying to do from

158
Part II Clinical chapters
my job in psychiatry in Cambridge. One of the ﬁrst things I did was to set up the
Psychiatric Interest Group and to start with there were only a few people in it: Penny
Rogers, John Woodcock, Graham Dickerson and myself. We were people working
on our own in large psychiatric institutions.
Elaine Streeter’s work at Charing Cross Hospital helped her to develop many
different connections between music therapy and other disciplines.
There I was in a Child Development Centre with a team of very interesting people
to work with and a good consultant (Dr Hugh Jolly - see Chapter 1). A lot of
parents would bring their children and they would want to know how to help them.
It’s a desperate time at that stage if you’ve got a child with a difﬁculty. Nordoff’s
teaching about improvisation was important because it helped me ﬁnd ways of 
making contact directly without words. That was a very important time to not just
look at music therapy but at all aspects – psychology, child development, neurology
– all these different connections. To come back (to Charing Cross) and to start
to integrate that having done a thesis on child development and rhythm was very
exciting.
Personal inﬂuences, both at home and overseas, contributed a great deal to
Tony Wigram’s career.
In my early years I was inﬂuenced and encouraged by Dr Derek Ricks, a consul-
tant paediatrician at Harperbury Hospital (see Chapter 1), an inspiring man and
someone keenly interested in music. He had a beautiful way with children and with
parents, which inspired me. He would get down on the ﬂoor and play with the 
children the moment they walked in the door.
Travelling has been a very big part of my music therapy life. It started from my
ﬁrst experience of a world congress in Paris in 1983 when I started to meet a large
body of other music therapists. I became inspired by different work going on. In
1985 I was awarded a Churchill Fellowship and travelled all over the United States.
I wanted to interact with people from different music therapy cultures and coun-
tries and get involved with them. That’s been something that has virtually taken
over my life now. I’m thinking of a lot of different and inspiring people who have
affected me whom I’ve met on the journey including:

Postscript
159
•
Ken Bruscia who had so much input to us in Denmark in the early 1990s with
his lectures. He’s written so brilliantly about models of music therapy theory
and praxis.
•
David Aldridge and Even Ruud in Europe who’ve really set a standard for music
therapy research and theory building.
Over the years I have become a lot more inﬂuenced by psychotherapeutic
approaches. That was an inﬂuence from Aalborg and the analytical model of 
working there and by the whole area of self-experience and personal therapy. 
At Aalborg, Inge Nygaard Pedersen from an intuitive therapeutic point of view has
been very inﬂuential, in her insight into how to work with students, into what their
motivations are. Lars Ole Bonde is the quintessential musician with a tremendous
knowledge of music and music psychology and musicology but at the same time is
very informed about therapeutic praxis as well.
I could make a long list of people I haven’t mentioned. Basically you develop in
your life by the inﬂuence the other people have on you, the way you take on their
ideas into yourself, their ways of thinking as you agree with them and ﬁnd them
helpful to you and developing your skills and your process and your personality.
The musical and personal combine in clinical practice and training. This can
be clearly observed in the clinical chapters in this section and in the com-
ments made by our colleagues in this postscript to the section. There are many
inﬂuences that contribute to the effective practice of music therapy. We 
now need to look more speciﬁcally at some of these personal and musical
resources in Part III on training.

This page intentionally left blank

Part III
Training

This page intentionally left blank

INTRODUCTION
Leslie Bunt and Sarah Hoskyns
Music is capable of amazing journeys and meanings.
(Birtwistle 1996 quoted in Andrews 1998)
New trainees enter a course with a range of strengths and weaknesses. Each
will have a rich and varied background of musical experiences. Typically stu-
dents may be music graduates (possibly with professional performance
experience) equipped with developed musical skills and sensitivity but with
less clinical awareness. Others might have come from a medical or educa-
tional background and have much experience in handling patient relation-
ships but less conﬁdence in their use of music. One of our aims as trainers
is to build and strengthen the crossovers and basic skills in musical and clin-
ical arenas. A central task of the emergent music therapist is the integration
of these areas, the specialist use of a person’s music and musical background
within a clinical context. As trainers we help to facilitate this integration,
this emphasis on underpinning musical know-how with clinical thinking, debate
and critical reﬂection. In practical terms this could mean, for example, that
a speciﬁc musical resource may be introduced by one of the music teachers
on the course and related by the music therapist tutor and supervisor to the
clinical setting. Personal development and awareness are vital areas: there is
always the need to be ﬂexible, tolerant and to adapt. Nor can we underes-
timate the development of a student’s imagination as part of the training
process. A student is helped to integrate these musical, clinical and personal
resources throughout the course of their training from a number of sources
including:
•
clinical improvisation: practising exercises, sharing between students
and tutors, role playing, aural and listening practice, instrumental and
vocal techniques for both individual and group contexts;
•
musical studies, for example: group improvisation workshops, extended
vocal and instrumental techniques, styles of improvising (free, jazz,
vocal and so on), speciﬁc instrumental teaching;

164
Part III Training
•
personal development: personal therapy, experiential music therapy and
other group work where the student gains knowledge of the therapeu-
tic process;
•
clinical practice: observation on placement of therapists at work, seeing
techniques and methods in practice, small group and individual super-
vision on both observations and each student’s own clinical work;
•
theoretical studies including: developmental psychology of music, music
therapy treatment models, psychological and medical studies.
The journey or pathway is often used as a metaphor for the training pro-
cess. Students feel much changed by their experiences in training beginning
with their attitude to music and how they listen and perform. We notice marked
differences between entering and departing from a course and acknowledge
the ways in which students struggle to integrate the diverse strands of learn-
ing. All the courses expect high commitment and the engagement of the whole
self in the training process – the Italians have a nice phrase for this – courses
not for ‘information’ but for ‘formation’ (non è un corso di informazione ma
di formazione). This means that to beneﬁt from the experience students will
need to be open, brave, reﬂective and questioning. Students engage with a
range of experiences as they work towards evolving their own approach to
the work, the development of their music therapy personality. It is a subtle
and personal learning process, different for each person, with each student
moving through the training in their own unique way.
The courses themselves seem also to adhere to the pattern of a life cycle
in microcosm. Students arrive (are born) with all the excitement, curiosity
and enthusiasm of new children. They are thirsty for information and the
newness is both exhausting and exhilarating. The next developmental phase
involves acquiring the skills and tools of the trade and beginning to move
out from the safety of the college into the area of clinical placements. We
observe much dependence on teachers and supervisors at this stage. Gra-
dually doubts surface and anxiety about competence mounts. Students 
identify very strongly with the needs of their patients and often begin to chal-
lenge the advice and help of staff in sometimes a rather rebellious way. At
this stage students may not be able to see alternative interpretations of their
work. As the group becomes older protests, storms and disagreements may
emerge and it is often hard for the training group to stay united. Striving to
be honest has its dangers when a student recognises somebody in the group
they originally tolerated now causes intense annoyance. How can such ten-
sion be resolved maturely? The ending of the training process gradually comes
into focus and, so as to model good therapy practice, careful attention is
given to prepare students for how they will feel and cope. Hopefully the course
has instilled a curiosity and manner of reﬂecting critically about the work
that will continue to shift and develop as the student moves into the work-
ing environment as a trained therapist.

Introduction
165
We note that this journey could be described as being within a develop-
mental frame that is be mirrored not only in therapeutic processes but also
in the early stages of experiencing supervision as discussed by Hawkins and
Shohet (1989) and further in Chapter 13. We begin Part III with a chapter
on observation and listening before presenting two resource-based chapters.

This page intentionally left blank

Chapter 10
Evolving a capacity for
wondering: the development
of observation and listening
skills
Sarah Hoskyns
INTRODUCTION
This chapter concentrates on the early stages of observational and aural learn-
ing in music therapy training, and develops a rationale for its importance.
The approaches described are by nature rather general, preparing students
to begin their clinical studies in one of a variety of placement settings. As
students become more attuned and alert to the overall process of music ther-
apy, their work becomes more patient-speciﬁc and thus more specialised obser-
vation based on the pathology of particular client groups is needed. This
chapter however will be conﬁned to the ﬁrst stage of work.
Before describing some approaches to teaching, we might start by con-
sidering a ﬁctional account of observation and listening.
. . . never before had she found a piece of music to be so full of surprises.
There were sudden ﬂashing tremolos at the beginning of bars, and
places where the music hesitated without losing its tempo, or sustained
the same speed despite appearing to halve or double it. Best of all, 
there were places where a note so high in pitch that it could barely be
sounded descended at exhilarating pace down through the scale, and fell
upon a reverberant bass note that barely had had time to ring before
there came a sweet alternation of bass and treble. It made her want to
dance or do something foolish.
(de Bernières 1994: 186)
In this passage from Captain Corelli’s Mandolin the novelist Louis de
Bernières is describing one of his characters listening to live music and 
making observations. The main female character Pelagia watches Captain
Corelli playing his beloved mandolin. Initially, Pelagia simply describes
what she sees and hears. She makes no emotionally overladen inferences about
what the music may actually mean. On one level she makes statements about
the music; its hesitation but within a consistent tempo, the high pitch, the
speed down the scale to the low bass note. But she is not content with mere

168
Part III Training
musical descriptors. She adds a second level with the adjectives ‘ﬂashing’,
‘exhilarating’, ‘reverberant’ and ‘sweet’ that obviously have a rich meaning
within her own use of language. The music must have had meaning for her
in that she found it ‘so full of surprises’ and she was encouraged to ‘dance
or do something foolish’. She observes in really careful detail, noting every
nuance but also thinks to herself about how it is affecting how she feels and
what it makes her want to do.
Soon after this moment the novelist continues:
. . . she watched wonderingly . . . as the ﬁngers of his left hand crawled
like a powerful and menacing spider up and down the diapason. She saw
the tendons moving and rippling beneath the skin, and then she saw that
a symphony of expressions was passing over his face; at times serene, at
times suddenly furious, occasionally smiling, from time to time stern and
dictatorial, and then coaxing and gentle. Transﬁxed by this, she realised
suddenly that there was something about music that had never been
revealed to her before: it was not merely the production of sweet sound;
it was, to those who understood it, an emotional and intellectual
odyssey. She watched his face, and forgot to attend any more to the music;
she wanted to share the journey.
(de Bernières 1994: 186)
We have now moved on to a deeper level of observation and listening. 
She ‘watched wonderingly’ and the language is full of the most beautiful
descriptions including her own personal feelings and inferences of mood. 
She enquires more thoroughly about her own responses. The language is
increasingly metaphorical, the ‘powerful and menacing spider’ gives a dif-
ferent character to the previously innocent left hand of the musician. We infer
a sexual undercurrent in the description of the rippling tendons. A tremend-
ous range of emotion is registered by her in this brief musical moment; fury,
joy, fear, tenderness. There is a sharing of meaning; the experience is a real
encounter between the music, the player and the listener. Pelagia is aware
of how deeply she has been affected. She is not just in love with the Captain
but is spellbound and transported by her experience of being part of the music.
She is drawn into an interaction.
For the music therapist, perhaps the most striking idea is Pelagia’s 
realisation that music is much more than a lovely sound. She discovers the
emotional and intellectual process, the possibility of different layers of com-
munication, and consciousness of the idea of journeying (always a helpful
metaphor for therapy). Pelagia discovers this by her involvement. Music teaches
her something new and profound.
So how might we begin to think about learning to observe and listen in
music therapy? There are within these two examples from Captain Corelli’s
Mandolin some interesting lessons on observation and listening. The author

Evolving a capacity for wondering
169
gives his heroine ample musical evidence coupled with more vivid language
to help the meaning of the scenes come alive for us. In essence he allows his
character to use acute and sensitive perceptions, empathy, imagination and
an openness to her own feelings. Likewise the trained music therapist uses
a delicate balance of all these features in professional practice to gain
knowledge of ‘the other’. But learning to achieve this balance is complicated
and time-consuming. It needs deconstruction, openness and much practice.
Overall it is the careful balance of external observation and self-observation
and an awareness of the communicative or non-communicative patterns that
emerge, which begin to foster the development of a ‘therapeutic attitude’
referred to in Chapter 2.
Why are observation and listening skills so important to therapists and
how do we learn to use and interpret the information gained? In the course
of this chapter the intention is to break down the processes of observing and
listening, to demystify the role of the experienced practitioner who ﬂuidly
combines these complex skills and to think about how we help students 
get better at these tasks. In order to do this, in the ﬁrst part of the chapter
we can look for some reference points within the traditions and practices 
of other schools of thought such as psychotherapy, ethology and philo-
sophy and in the description of case work in other professions. A further
consideration here is to see how the pursuit of art forms such as literature,
music and dance in themselves can teach us something about the process 
of observation and listening in therapy. In the second part of the chapter
we look at a number of different strategies and pathways for developing 
alertness and responsivity in our perceptual skills and understanding our 
own reactions. The ﬁnal section demonstrates an observational exercise
undertaken with some ﬁlmed clinical work at different stages of training and
experience (at the start of training, on completion of training and as an experi-
enced practitioner).
SECTION 1: SOME REFERENCE POINTS FOR
OBSERVATION AND LISTENING
The awareness of the need for listening and observation skills is paramount
in the early stages in any clinical or therapeutic training. It is the feature
that links medicine, psychology and the different therapies; the clinician needs
to be able to pay detailed attention to the patient and to be vigilant about
what is discovered. Through doing this, we can pinpoint features of the per-
son’s physical, communicative and social behaviour and begin to ascertain
clues about mood and mental state. Before any treatment can be imagined,
we need to ‘get to know’ the patient; to have collected the ﬁne details of how
they are (in relation to self and others); to be able to feel ‘in their skin’ and
gradually to make an assessment of their needs.

170
Part III Training
As therapists we also need to understand and process our own reactions
to what we observe. Trainee doctors learn to ‘take a history’ and to make
a careful examination of the patient, noting any signs or symptoms of ill-
ness. These are then related to emerging understanding of normal anatomy
and physiology and the study of pathology. Student clinical psychologists
might make in-depth observations of patterns of behaviour in their patients
and perhaps, for example identify the antecedent events and the consequences
of self-injurious behaviour in young people with learning disability. Trainee
child psychotherapists make detailed study of early communication and 
relationships between infants and parents and learn to take a concentrated
emotional ‘reading’ of their encounters with the baby and their family and
caregivers. The arts therapies are in an interesting position in that we might
see links with a number of more established disciplines and build our prac-
tice on some of their methods and procedures. We also have the art form
itself to consider; the particular nature of art throws up its own methods
and ideas as described later in this section.
Whatever our professional orientation, learning these skills effectively
establishes good patterns of clinical practice and is surprisingly tiring and
difﬁcult for new trainees. We develop many assumptions about ‘reading’ 
people’s behaviours and our patterns for doing this need to be re-examined.
Initially we need to discover how to be open to possibility; how not to jump
to conclusions prematurely but rather to sharpen the clarity and focus of
our perceptions.
Mother–infant observations
Some psychoanalytic training courses begin their programmes with close infant
observation precisely for this reason – the student focuses solely on the busi-
ness of being the observer. The task is not to act but to wait and pay atten-
tion ‘to dramas which usually slip away and are forgotten’ (Miller et al. 1989:
3). It offers a discipline and a method and an intense focus on the inner emo-
tional world of the infant. Time is allowed to take things in and to consider
the complexity. The observer also concentrates on the qualities of relating
as they are experienced moment by moment, and considers their impact 
on the observer’s own feelings as well as those of the active partners. Music
therapy training courses pioneered by the Roehampton Institute, London
often use similar or adapted methods to help students orientate themselves
towards observation in their work. There are particular beneﬁts to the music
therapist in focusing on the preverbal communication of babies and their
mothers’ responses. Patients may often have little effective speech, through
delayed development, learning difﬁculty, injury or debilitating illness, and 
looking intensely at the nuances of communication in this nursing partner-
ship focuses the trainee’s attention and awareness on non-verbal patterns.
Pavlicevic’s concept of dynamic form (Pavlicevic 1997: 118) referred to in

Evolving a capacity for wondering
171
Chapters 2 and 4 has been linked to and developed from the musical and
affective aspects of mother–baby relationships. The ‘music’ or ‘dance’ of early
parent–infant contact has often been observed, and many music therapists
ﬁnd this concept persuasive and important in their work, particularly in work
with non-verbal clients.
Another important part of close infant observation is the sharing and 
processing of experience with a teacher and fellow trainee observers. The 
seminar group can think together about the meaning of things and ﬁlter the
ebb and ﬂow of events. For example the group can help the observer under-
stand issues such as the impact of the baby’s helplessness. The observer is
also ‘helpless’ in a sense, having to sit by and not be able to sort things out.
The group might recognise the parallels and see how the baby expresses any
difﬁculties. How are needs met? How does the mother recognise any signals,
and how does she feel what the baby feels?
Ethology
Returning to our opening quotation concerning the observation of Captain
Corelli playing the mandolin, a nice key or clue is provided by the phrase
‘watched wonderingly’. For the character Pelagia this could mean that while
she watches, she ponders and thinks, asking herself questions. This process
is essential for the professional clinician who acts as a kind of detective (where
are the links? what does this signify? is there a pattern to this?). However,
Pelagia is also full of amazement at what she observes; there is a sense of
wonder, an openness to being taken beyond herself, to seek beneath the sur-
face. Both the artist and the therapist are at home in this area of thought.
By happy accident there is also a nice link in this idea of ‘watching and
wondering’ with the discipline of ethology. This can be deﬁned as the sys-
tematic study of animals’ behaviour in natural environments, and emerged
as a branch of zoology in the 1930s and 1940s. Ethology has reﬁned and
specialised the process of observation, initially with birds and animals in nat-
ural environments. Bowlby’s research on attachment combined his interest
in ethology and his training as a psychoanalyst (Bowlby 1969) and other psy-
chologists and clinicians have used the principles of ethology as a rigorous
method for understanding the social behaviour of humans (for example Hinde
1979). Tinbergen and Tinbergen (when explaining principles of method in
ethology in Autistic Children: New Hope for Cure) write about the import-
ance of ‘watching and wondering’. Phenomena are perceived as they occur
naturally and in all their rich patterning but through doing so systematically,
the observer begins to form hunches and test these theories against practice
(Tinbergen and Tinbergen 1983: 19–24). Tinbergen and Tinbergen, and latterly,
consultant clinical psychologist John Richer have made specialist studies 
of autistic children and families using ethological principles (for example Richer
1983, 2001). While behaviour lies at the heart of their enquiries, these

172
Part III Training
researchers have also been able to explore the motivation and feelings of their
autistic subjects in a way very helpful to therapists interested in the inner
world of clients. As teachers and researchers of music therapy, we have 
both found that borrowing a framework from ethology has often been a very
useful way to introduce principles of observation to students, and also to
begin to observe for research. The following description of the process of
observation seems very pertinent to trainees’ experience.
at ﬁrst glance, ‘behaviour’ seems to be an endlessly variable, almost chaotic
ﬂow of events (movements, postures and gestures, . . .) a random jum-
ble in which no order can be detected at all . . . The aim of the observer
is to refuse to believe that all these events are in fact random; he ‘feels
in his bones’ because he has noticed it unconsciously and intuitively that
it is possible to discern some kind of order . . .
(Tinbergen and Tinbergen 1983: 24)
Story-telling
We started with the idea of the novelist describing his characters and per-
haps one might say that the job of the therapist does not require the ﬁnesse
and beauty with language that the novelist pursues by necessity. However,
the attention to psychological and perceptual detail is a vital requirement,
and the precision and clarity of description is a joy to read and a target to
aim for. Maybe our motivation to become therapists comes in part from our
interest in clients’ stories and how they tell, show or play them to us. This
is an attitude clearly shared with the novelist. Ben Okri writes passionately
in A Way of Being Free of the human importance of story-telling:
Stories are very patient things. They drift about quietly in your soul. . . .
Stories . . . are living things; and their real life begins when they start to
live in you. Then they never stop living, or growing, or mutating, or feed-
ing the groundswell of imagination, sensibility and character.
(Okri 1997: 43)
It seems that there is a parallel here with music, and the practice of music
therapy. We as music therapists engage in a particular way of sharing musi-
cal stories with our patients. We interact with their music and help it unfurl
and reveal itself. The process is interactive yet focused on the patient’s needs.
The patients’ stories start to live in us. Of course any individual patient’s
‘story’ may remain in musical form and our responses in the session like-
wise, but in writing case notes we link with the novelist and try to form the
experiences in words. The art of the case study in clinical disciplines is a 
fascinating way of passing on the history of our work to others and it is done
through the revealing of ‘story’. Axline’s moving case of Dibs, a child she

Evolving a capacity for wondering
173
worked with in play therapy, has been in print for many years (Axline 1964);
the intriguing stories of Oliver Sacks’ neurological patients (Sacks 1985), and
the case studies of Freud, such as ‘Dora’ and ‘Little Hans’ (Freud 1905) are
well known to quite a general public perhaps simply because they are ‘tales
well told’.
Professor Baum (referred to in Chapter 1) reminded Leslie Bunt to
encourage music therapists to ‘keep telling your stories’ and there are
increasing numbers of engaging case stories in the music therapy literature.
Recent interesting examples are in Pavlicevic’s collection Intimate Notes (1999a)
where aspects of the therapists’ personal histories are set alongside case 
material and Hibben’s Inside Music Therapy (1999) where collaborations with
families and clients themselves have assisted in telling about the work. In
Chapter 9, Odell-Miller examines the idea of music therapy sustaining the
narrative skills of Patient M within the course of his treatment. John
Sloboda has likened the process of musical improvisation to the ‘recounting
of a story by a skilled story-teller’ (Sloboda 1985: 139–141). The weaving of
art forms and the therapy continue to be closely linked.
The music appraiser and analyst
The practice of the arts heightens awareness of our senses and works rigor-
ously on the ordering of information from eye, ear and touch. The develop-
ment of the eye and ‘ways of seeing’ for the visual artist is paramount. 
For musicians, the early years of training will focus our aural acuity in very
precise ways. Careful attention to detail for eye and ear among artists and
musicians are tools of the trade and promote mastery. But these skills also
enhance our understanding of the world around us. Indeed Christopher 
Small has also argued in his book Musicking (Small 1998) that they increase
our sense of relatedness and humanity and therefore can proﬁtably be har-
nessed and integrated for the very rich beneﬁt of the therapeutic discipline.
Our artistic imaginative selves have a powerful part to play in understand-
ing our patients: use of imagery, metaphor, pattern, sound and all kinds of
non-verbal communication inform us.
The years of work spent by musicians listening to their own sound and that
of ensembles can be a great training ground for learning to listen in therapy.
It may seem unusual or perhaps too time-consuming to apply a critical or
analytic musical ear to the improvisations in music therapy. Certainly it can
be a demanding job, but paying attention to this gives interesting rewards
as long as we take time to assess the signiﬁcance within the communication
between the partners or group in therapy (Ann Sloboda and Richard Bolton
describe these two strands in Chapter 8).
Let us consider an example of how this might work in practice. Fraser
Simpson explores the delicacy of his elderly client’s vocal changes to the melody
line of ‘Blue Moon’ in his chapter for the book Music Therapy in Dementia

174
Part III Training
Care (Simpson 2000). Simpson identiﬁes and notates the subtle elaborations
of both the client and himself as they play with the tune. It is the kind of
exercise one might have done for aural notation in ‘Advanced Level’ Music.
But it shows us exactly how Edward builds and lengthens his phrases, plays
with ‘da, doo and diddly’ vocal sounds and eventually how he is motivated
to get up from his chair to swing his arms. (Like Pelagia, the music created
makes him want to dance.) Simpson, the person and therapist, is very
moved by his patient’s deﬁance of his illness – by his real lively spirit. But
because of his careful critical analysis of his work as a musician, we see exactly
how he comes to that conclusion. Recording, listening, notating, analysing
and assessing the meaning: all these are tools of the trained musician and
good ‘evidence-based practice’, a necessary requirement of state registered
practitioners in all disciplines in the UK.
The position of the philosopher
The philosopher, according to an account given by Jostein Gaarder in
Sophie’s World, has a special observatory relationship with the world, akin
to that of the small child, which perhaps provides a useful reference point
here. Gaarder’s character argues that ‘the world itself becomes a habit in no
time at all. It seems as if in the process of growing up we lose the ability 
to wonder about the world’. This is about having or re-establishing an inno-
cent view and thus a genuinely inquiring mind. Little children naturally 
consider the world astonishing. Adults generally ‘accept the world as a 
matter of course’. Like philosophers, therapists need to avoid habit in their
observations and to continue to see the world as ‘. . . a bit unreasonable –
bewildering, even enigmatic’ (Gaarder 1991: 16). Perhaps we have to go through
a comparable process of reorienting our view of things. A psychotherapist’s
stance might be to learn to sit with the unbearable anxiety of a child’s help-
lessness: the philospher’s position to stick with the ‘huge mystery’ and not
get too comfortable in the world. However we might think of it, the task
seems to be to try to perceive things as they really are, in all their com-
plexity and paradox rather than how they seem to be on the surface. We
also need to be able to keep the ambiguity of different views in mind. Gaarder’s
notion is that we need to exist as he describes it ‘at the tip of the rabbit’s
fur’ where there is sharpness of focus and clarity, rather than nestled com-
fortably at the root, ignoring detail, not wanting to know.
All of this connects to the building of a therapeutic attitude referred to in
Chapter 2. It takes time and practice to learn to take things in from differ-
ent perspectives. Students regularly begin with a jumble of responses. They
may not have a clear distinction between their own feelings and what might
be the feelings and reactions of others, and the witnessed events. This is com-
plicated. We obviously do have feelings about what we see and hear, and these
will yield us important information. But we have to learn to understand and

Evolving a capacity for wondering
175
use them. A client’s situation can be viewed from many different perspect-
ives. What are the questions to ask? How do we decide what is the truth in
any situation? Perhaps the endpoint for therapists is in being able to toler-
ate ambiguity, to accept complex layers. But ﬁrst we have to ﬁnd ways to
get at them, to unravel and make sense of the picture. In the next section
we look at some methods for building awareness and skill at taking things
in (through eyes, ears and feelings) and ﬁnding ways to record them.
SECTION 2: SOME STRATEGIES FOR FOCUSING
OBSERVATION AND LISTENING IN MUSIC
THERAPY TRAINING
Pathways for developing our perceptual awareness can and need to be
developed from many angles and there is a whole impact in arts therapy train-
ing of the various strands coming together. We sharpen our focus and learn
to listen and read situations in more detail. A starting point is to divide up
the active relating/playing role and the reﬂective listening role of the thera-
pist and to concentrate in detail on each. Many courses begin with periods
of observational work of various kinds and in order to get students to absorb
and feel engaged in this process. It is often hard not to be ‘doing’ things 
at the beginning and just starting to try out this reﬂective stance is in itself
useful learning. Chapters 11 and 12 tackle some issues regarding the more
active playing and relating side of music therapy. Here we look at the
reﬂective listening one. Three common areas of observational learning in 
music therapy training are:
1
observation of the general context of music therapy at a placement;
2
observation/listening live music therapy sessions in a music therapy cen-
tre or outside placement;
3
study of audio- or videotape of music therapy cases.
Usually this kind of work involves seminar support from a tutor or super-
visor who will help and guide the students’ perceptions.
General observation of work on clinical
placements
Let us consider some general visits to placements ﬁrst. In the early stages it
is easy to get overwhelmed with information and to polarise into one of two
positions: either noting everything in great detail and ﬁnding it hard to know
what is important (pages and pages of notes); or ﬁnding it hard to notice
anything and writing very little. Decisions need to be made about whether
you keep notebook in hand as you go, or whether at ﬁxed points in the day

176
Part III Training
Table 10.1 Prompts and ideas for general observation on clinical placements
1 The hospital/centre/school itself
(a)
The range of illness/handicap/problems dealt with.
(b)
The atmosphere or prevailing mood of the institution as you observe it.
(c)
Interest of staff.
(d)
Integration of staff team.
(e)
Methods of approach to patients by individual staff.
(f)
General interaction of staff and clients within the institution.
2 Organisation of music therapy
(a)
Is there one room for work or does the therapist move to the patients/clients?
(b)
Position in room (of patients/clients, staff, equipment etc.).
(c)
What instruments are used?
(d)
Is attendance optional?
(e)
How are clients referred for music therapy and sessions organised?
(f)
How long are the sessions?
3 Relationships existing
(a)
Between patients themselves.
(b)
Yourself and therapist (how at ease you are).
(c)
Therapist and staff (how is music therapy viewed?).
(d)
Therapist and clients (what qualities do you observe?).
(e)
Patients and yourself.
Note Do try to notice your own reactions – how at ease you feel with patients, and
the reasons for this (e.g. appearance; extent of handicaps or difﬁculties; your own
fears; reactions to environment, care of patients etc.).
4 Within music therapy sessions (with reference to patients, staff, self)
Try to observe these areas generally and in particular in relation to the music.
(a)
Body position.
(b)
Body contact (use of touch).
(c)
Use of gestures/signs.
(d)
General movement of body and limbs (including repetitive and stereotyped
patterns).
(e)
Eye contact.
(f)
Facial expression.
(g)
Vocalisation (and/or speech).
(h)
Attention to instruments and people.
(i)
Any instrumental preferences.
(j)
‘Social’ skills (sharing, waiting, listening, receiving and giving etc.).
(k)
Development or change during session (and is there any observable cause?).
(l)
General behaviour before and after the music therapy session.
(m) Speciﬁc musical initiatives and responses (in any of these areas: pitch,
rhythm/duration, timbre, loudness, melody, harmony, form/structure etc.).
(n)
Therapist’s style of leadership (high/low structure; directive/non-directive).
These are some issues you might consider in making your preliminary observations 
at clinical placements and you may ﬁnd them useful for reference. The list is not
intended to be compulsory or exhaustive but just a starting point for raising
awareness.

Evolving a capacity for wondering
177
you write up in as much detail as you can remember. The latter is very use-
ful training as you cannot write your notes while you work in sessions, and
it helps us stimulate our memory for meaningful events. Mother–baby
observations are usually conducted in this way, leaving the listener-observer
free to really concentrate.
A frame consisting of prompts or questions to ask yourself can be useful
in general visits to placements and indeed some therapists use a kind of prompt
sheet as a regular note-writing tool when practising professionally. Table 10.1
shows an example of some prompt questions that might be used to guide
observations in early visits. Questions like these jog our memories in vari-
ous areas that may be signiﬁcant. They focus our attention on a small part
at a time so that we can attend in more detail. Listening is also prompted
by these questions and a ﬁle with manuscript paper is useful for noting musi-
cal ideas and extracts.
At this stage the questions are quite wide-ranging and allow us to notice
physical details and also enquire about some of our feeling reactions.
Although most of the questions focus on the music therapy session itself 
there is also attention to the context of the institution. As seen in Chapter
2, norms and values of the therapist and others within the setting have 
their own impact on practical work with patients, and it is helpful to be aware
of this early on. Notes resulting from this kind of observational frame 
can then be discussed in seminars and trainees can see how others react to
their ideas.
How do we begin to observe without making too
many inferences?
Early attempts at studying the music therapy process often include a num-
ber of personal judgements and preconceptions, as discussed earlier. We need
to be aware of when we are stating quite simple easily shared facts or
behaviours and when we are having a personal response or hunch (or intu-
ition) about what we experience. Using the concept of being able to ‘watch,
listen and wonder’, our ﬁrst task might be to take careful note of what 
we see and hear, but gradually through concentrating in this way we might
start to gain a feeling impression of what events could mean. Trainees can
explore this idea by concentrating on one area at a time. For example, a class
exercise examining an extract of individual music therapy casework on
video might be as follows:
Class exercise (a)
Group 1
watches and listens with great attention, taking notes of the 
easily shared simple practical details, taking care not to make 
judgements.

178 
Part III Training
Table 10.2 Case notes on music therapy group work with probation clients 
WATCHING 
WONDERING
Summary of events
Session 9 (for old group)/Session 4 (for new 
group)
At the session start-time, no one had arrived.
\
After 7 minutes, client P
 came in rather 
hurriedly, quickly followed by D, both clients 
in the newer group at the centre. D was 
surprised that there were so few people there 
and particularly that there was no one from 
the old group. (7 or 8 clients had been usual in 
the previous weeks.) I said this session would 
include some review between the two groups, 
but that we should do some playing first with 
whoever came.
D said he wanted to play the drum kit so 
proceeded to assemble it.
P
 could not decide what he wanted to play and 
looked in the cupboard, but eventually sat 
down at the piano for a while as D put the 
drums together. However, he quite quickly got 
up again and stood by the piano and then 
paced round the room. Eventually, he spotted 
the xylophones and glockenspiel and built a ^  
structure of xylophones on the closed piano lid 
and top of the piano. I
 said that he looked 
more comfortable standing up to play, and he 
smiled and waved his arms with the beaters 
doing a twisting movement.
I collected 3 small hand percussion 
instruments and suggested that we began 
playing freely to loosen ourselves up and see 
what it was like playing together. Music was 
quite restrained in volume, D played in a hesitant 
way on the drums but explored the different 
surfaces of the kit. P
 had his back to us and his 
music was quiet but unconnected rhythmically 
to D or me. he was doing his own thing.
E
 (from the old group) arrived while we were 
playing and nodded appreciatively and 
/
listened until we finished. We went on to /
 
discuss his time in the group and I suggested 
that he possibly had come late because it was 
uncomfortable to think about leaving.
He agreed with th is.------------------------------------>
Comments and thoughts
It looked as if the more experienced group were 
vetoing my suggestion that we had a review of the 
sessions.They don’t want to think about working 
towards leaving? They all said later that they ‘had 
things to finish off’ in other workshops.
Theme of feeling pushed out by the new group 
still prevails? I feel annoyed/rejected -  I’m 
probably meant to! Hard for the group to 
discuss the ending?
a NB last week’s discussion about not having the 
drum kit, so that people can hear better could 
not really be pursued as none of old group 
were around. It feels fragmented to me -  
undermining what the group builds up.
However the new group members have a 
X
hance to explore a bit themselves -  they can 
reconstruct the instruments in their own way.
I have not really seen anybody do this before!
It was practical -  made a stand for the 
instruments and P seemed a lot happier being 
able to use some energy/agitation by moving 
as he played. He was able to stay in contact 
with the piano (instrument he wants to play) 
but also shut it off.
P seems fairly oblivious to the rest of us -  but 
discharging quite a bit of his own tension.
It was possible to talk with E about significant 
achievements he had made, particularly with 
commitment to the group, and to link his 
actions and his feelings (i.e. not wanting to 
come today).This seemed positive and useful for 
other group members to hear.
This surprised me!

Evolving a capacity for wondering
179
Group 2
wonders about things and is asked to question how it makes them
feel; to observe themselves and their reactions as they watch; to
respond to intuitions.
The tutor and class can then discuss the results of these two different per-
spectives. If a number of trainees do the same Group 1 task, they can com-
pare the different things that are noticed and see which ideas can be shared
and agreed. Trainees can also compare the subjective feeling reactions they
have held in Group 2. There may be overlaps, or striking personal differ-
ences. In doing this exercise with a number of training groups in recent years,
one also becomes aware of the wealth of information that can be gleaned.
Trainees are often surprised how much they can discover. Tinbergen sug-
gests the importance of trying to adopt ‘a truly enquiring, not prematurely
prejudiced state of mind’ but also emphasises how the intuitive hunch
begins to appear if simple careful observation (and listening) is achieved
(Tinbergen and Tinbergen 1983: 19).
This class exercise can then be applied to a naturalistic setting on place-
ment and the student therapists can observe music therapy from both 
perspectives themselves. Table 10.2 gives an example of some case notes con-
structed in this way. The material is an extract of some semi-open group 
work with probation clients to show how one might use this plan to record
clinical work.
As the training group begin to become more aware of the difference between
simple shared details and their own individual perspective, we can begin to
expand our areas of focus. Another class exercise with a second extract of
ﬁlmed case work could be as follows:
Class exercise (b)
Group 1
‘Behaviour’: this group takes notice of the events, movements, posi-
tions (much as Group 1 did before).
Group 2
‘Interaction’: this group pays attention to ‘contact between’ the
participants; any gestural, postural, facial connections; vocal or
verbal; instrumental.
Group 3
‘Music’: this group listens to and takes note of as much musical
detail as possible; using manuscript to notate (prompt areas 
suggested in Table 10.1 can be used to guide); and trying to describe
qualities.
In all groups, the trainees try to avoid making judgements and discuss the
ﬁndings together in the class. Overlaps in the categories are noticed (for ex-
ample, music itself is ‘behaviour’) but this is inevitable. The class as a whole
then suggest their own perspectives and begin to make inferences about 
the signiﬁcance or meaning of all the information. The point of all of this

180
Part III Training
is to base our feeling or intuitive reactions on the musical and behavioural 
evidence. We can use the latter to give weight to our clinical judgement or
interpretation.
Class exercise (c) Identifying clinical features
Having amassed a range of information in the previous exercise, the group
and tutor can move on to examine the clinical information presented. 
For example exercise (b) could have shown a four-minute extract of music
therapy with an adult with learning disability and challenging behaviour. 
The group could begin to make an assessment of various areas of general
functioning and communication for the patient. This could involve, among
other issues, the patient’s:
•
use of expressive and receptive language;
•
willingness to explore instruments;
•
use of and reactions to vocalisation;
•
tolerance of proximity to another person.
The group might also look at, for example: evidence of cognition; repetit-
ive behaviour; spontaneous communication, communication related to the
therapist (dialogue, synchronous music), aggressive gestures and so on.
These sorts of features could then help to build on knowledge of the client
group and the speciﬁc use of music therapy in treatment.
Focus on listening to the music of music therapy
The detailed attention to the aural world of music therapy has always had
an important focus in the writings of Nordoff–Robbins-trained therapists,
as was seen in Simpson’s work above. My teaching at the Guildhall School,
London has been inﬂuenced by the work of our tutors trained in this
approach (Jackie Robarts and Elaine Streeter). We can apply something 
of the two-stage strategy, described above with mainly visual information,
to what we hear of music therapy on audiotape. That is, we can transcribe
into music notation many of the musical ‘events’ and describe their form and
quality; but then also be aware of our subjective feeling responses to what
we hear. A clinical judgement about the material will involve a synthesis of
the musical details and our assessment of their meaning.
In training, students study taped material and transcribe parts of their 
sessions. From the score they can examine the detail of musical interac-
tion or indeed absence of interaction in their work. This work can then be
discussed in regular seminars of the training group and students can begin
to weigh up the implications of any musical dialogue. Figure 10.1 gives an
example of short extracts of case material transcribed from the session

Evolving a capacity for wondering 
181
Change in harmonic colour: therapist (voice and guitar). 
Deliberate playing in the spaces: child (top line piano).
A
Following the child playing more deliberately, the therapist sings 
a longer, more defined melodic phrase with forward movement.
B
Therapist responds to child's 
sudden turn by singing louder 
and with more accent.
Looks round suddenly
Child begins a lively triple rhythm and therapist responds with 
a dance-like tune.
c
Childs’ playing becomes ‘larger’ as he 
stands up and bangs the piano frame. 
(Attention-seeking or part of the music?)
Figure 10.1
 Transcription of short extacts of a music therapy session with Child N.
Child -  piano
Therapist -  voice
La la la la la
etc
guitar
La 
la la
La 
la la
piano
voice
etc
oiano
La la la
etc
voice
guitar

182
Part III Training
observed in the ﬁnal part of this chapter. It indicates the kind of transcrip-
tion that might be useful for students to undertake.
Elaine Streeter spoke in her interview for this book about the inﬂuence of
further psychotherapeutic training on her understanding of the importance
of listening in music therapy. The combination of the musician’s sensitivity
to sonorities and forms of sound and the psychotherapist’s interest in com-
munication of meaning provide a powerful frame for understanding:
You really learn how to listen for everything, to the tone of voice, to the feelings .
. . It’s about the quality of being with somebody. Listening is probably acknowledged
as one of the major skills of the counsellor or psychotherapist. It’s listening for mean-
ing, trying to help the person to ﬁnd signiﬁcance in a sound or a cry. Sometimes
the words used have got nothing to do with what they feel. It’s a surface layer. It’s
about what they might be struggling or daring to say – or very often not being able
to put words to. It’s not just being able to sit there and listen but being able to be
curious and interested by little moments or expressions or tones of voice. I suppose
that a lot of our work is about helping people make connections with other sounds
that they may have just made so that a sound is not just an isolated incident but
can link up with other things that are happening. In music therapy we get inter-
ested in the absolute minute details of a sound.
Rachel Verney examined an interesting process for working receptively 
and then actively with the intricate musical details of a session at the 2001
BSMT/APMT Conference. She stressed how helpful musical listening can
be to inform the work of future sessions and proposed a three-stage model
of ‘Listening–Thinking–Doing’ ﬁrstly in the session itself and then in res-
ponse to an audiotape of the therapy. This process can constantly reﬂect on
and feed into the ongoing work in music therapy (Verney 2001).
The growth of personal awareness
The experiential parts of training courses, music therapy groups, verbal 
experiential work, therapeutic movement groups and students’ personal
therapy all assist to heighten general observation skills and self-awareness.
These are rather difﬁcult to pinpoint as they are highly personal in nature,
but nonetheless affect signiﬁcantly students’ capacity to reﬂect on the pro-
cess of music therapy. In my own experience of training groups, students
often become much more able to ‘read’ body language – their own and that
of others. They start to see some of their own prejudices in how they think
about their work, and more readily can empathise and understand strange
and difﬁcult behaviours. They also start to use feelings more actively. 

Evolving a capacity for wondering
183
For example, Helen Tyler described the growing understanding gained by
students in training of cultural difference through working in movement. 
The group noticed the difference in meaning of the tiny steps taken by 
an Eastern student compared to the large relaxed stride of a Westerner 
(Tyler 1999). Work in mother–infant observation undertaken in various 
levels of detail on British training courses also helps students identify some
of their own emotional responses to infant needs and expression.
The case study as story
As case work develops students collect all their observation, listening and
evaluation and begin to shape the story of the work with patients. In this
volume, clinical practitioners have ﬁltered, selected and organised periods of
work with their patients and explained some of its meaning from different
perspectives. In his lively book, Approaches to Case Study, Higgins takes the
reader through varied uses of the case study and provides helpful advice 
to the arts therapist on ways to engage the reader. He particularly stresses
the importance of giving a real ﬂavour and quality of our therapy (Higgins
1993). Hence, music therapy case stories need to be accompanied by aural
illustrations and perhaps we can think musically about how we will unfold
the tale?
A simple structure for the information that can be included in case 
studies is as follows:
(a) name (or pseudonym), age and some description of how the patient 
presents (this could include musical or other illustration);
(b) diagnosis (if appropriate or known);
(c) background: family history; referral and any other treatment; assessment
of needs of patient;
(d) general aims for therapy;
(e) summary of the themes of the work (including examples of music ther-
apy process);
(f) discussion (assessing the meaning of the work);
(g) conclusions and recommendations for the future.
Clearly many case studies do not have this structure and it would be 
valuable for student therapists to evolve suitable frames of their own, but
the above contains some typical details that may be included. (See other sug-
gested references in this chapter and the models used in the clinical chapters
of this book.)

184
Part III Training
SECTION 3: AN ENQUIRY INTO APPROACHES TO
OBSERVATION AND LISTENING BY MUSIC
THERAPISTS AT DIFFERENT LEVELS OF
EXPERIENCE AND TRAINING
This section describes a piece of work where some music therapists at dif-
ferent stages of their training and practice were asked to do the same task
as observer-listeners. The study was not controlled but simply a starting point
to gather information and to enquire whether music therapists might evolve
ways of looking and listening that are qualitatively different at different stages
in their training and work. In the process of training we might aim to raise
awareness of clinical musical detail and possible meanings as discussed
above, but does this really happen?
The task was this. Music therapists at three stages in training and work
were each asked to look at the same section of video-ﬁlmed case work. The
video was shown twice with a few minutes’ gap between each playing so that
the trainee or qualiﬁed therapists could make a few written notes and then
watch again. After watching the ﬁlm for the second time they could make
any further notes for a few minutes, and then a short unstructured interview
was recorded with the people. The interview began with the following ques-
tion: ‘What do you think is happening here? Please describe and discuss some
of your ideas’. The ﬁlm lasted four minutes and showed a piece of musical
dialogue between a young boy at the piano and the therapist using voice 
and guitar.
The different stages of training/work of the therapists were:
1
in the ﬁrst week of training (a group of three new students);
2
in the last week of training (a different group of three students);
3
a clinician of 25 years’ experience with children (my co-author).
A summary of the clinical extract on ﬁlm, as experienced by the therapist,
is given below on page 185.
Results of observation and listening
In the three sections shown in Table 10.3 are contained the ideas or con-
structs that the trainees and therapist developed about the extract in their
interview. They observed and listened and some of the issues they discussed
are listed in this table.

Evolving a capacity for wondering
185
Clinical extract
Background
The extract shows part of an individual session with N, a young child of six years
old, who had quite severely impaired vision and delayed development in his speech
and cognition. In his class at school, he also showed patterns of difﬁcult/challeng-
ing behaviour and related little to his peers. He experienced much frustration in
verbal communication. It was quite hard to understand his limited language and he
often stammered. The recent birth of a younger sibling (one year previously) had
also put him under a lot of stress emotionally, and he showed many regressed 
babyish characteristics (falling over, knocking things over, crying and generally 
needing lots of personal attention). He found it very hard to concentrate especially
in class. Originally I worked with N in a group, and decided that he needed more
one-to-one time.
The session (see Figure 10.1 for notated musical extracts)
This session took place after about six months of individual work. He was very 
responsive to musical patterns and easily invested in the work. The sequence shows
N sitting down at the piano with his back to me, looking to the side from time to
time. I am sitting behind him on the ﬂoor playing a guitar and singing (improvising
and following his gestures). He is ‘doing his own thing’ ﬁddling with the piano keys
making little ﬂurries of sound, pushing the keys up and down and experimenting
with the pedal. He seems to be aware that I am there, looking over his shoulder
from time to time. I have the impression that he becomes increasingly aware that
his playing is having an impact on me and what I am doing and starts to play with
more emphasis, space and links. We form a quite deliberate dialogue.
I change my playing from little ﬂamenco style ‘ﬂutters’ to a more dramatic/
grandiose 2/2 time and he looks round at me purposefully. I get louder as he 
looks round again to reinforce our connection. He seems encouraged to get more
expansive. He stands up on his chair, begins to bang the frame of the piano. It
looks less ‘desirable behaviour’, but he is part of the music: we are really playing
together. As the music becomes louder he stands on the keyboard stretching all
round. Sadly I realise the wall-mounted ﬁre is a bit of a threat for safety. I am
rather unsure whether to intervene and let it go as long as I can but eventually
invite him down. He says ‘Hee, hee hee!’. The moment is lost. He’s off with some-
thing else.

186
Part III Training
Table 10.3 Results of observation and listening at three stages of experience.
Interview 1: New students in week 1 21.9.98.
1
He seemed very bothered that the therapist was behind him.
2
Even though he has a visual impairment he was turning around a lot.
3
He was very aware of the noises behind him.
4
He knew the therapist was there.
5
I thought he was quite fearless.
6
He was quite inquisitive.
7
Checking to see that the therapist liked what he was doing.
8
Playing with the therapist a little bit.
9
‘Ha ha look at what I’m doing’.
10
‘I’m not really listening to you’.
11
Such a vivid imagination.
12
Very responsive to what therapist was doing.
13
‘Are you still with me?’
14
‘I’m going to take control’.
15
‘Here’s the pace’ and therapist matched that.
16
Then it just got really exciting.
17
He takes it one step further (tapping/standing up).
18
He just wanted to keep going.
19
‘Is she still with me on this?’ Then quickened the pace.
20
I was worried/glad therapist stopped him.
Interview 2: Students in week 36 (last week) 20.7.00.
1
There was a kind of space (physical) and space which allowed the interaction.
2
Started off at random.
3
Seemed to start stopping, when therapist was playing.
4
He’d stop more clearly (while therapist goes ‘La la la’).
5
A sense of pulse.
6
Became more rhythmic.
7
Tiny phrases between the two.
8
He started to get faster and I think the therapist changed the accompaniment.
9
This ﬂexible pulse became really this kind of frame.
10
Sense of searching with his hand.
11
Music became more structured.
12
Certain stillness in the body like he is listening.
13
Wanting to control.
14
I had the feeling he just wanted the music to grow.
15
Just got too big for the piano.
16
Quite dramatic the way suddenly the music rides?
17
Using just little ﬁngers, then suddenly big sound.
18
Feeling of testing towards the end.
19
‘He, he, he, I’ve got you, you stop what you’re doing’.
Interview 3: Experienced therapist (25 years of clinical work) 5.8.00.
1
Use a Stern type idea – here was an adult and child in an engaged moment.
2
Were many elements that were quite contrasting.
3
Overall it had a sort of feel of sustained interaction.

Evolving a capacity for wondering
187
Discussion
It was interesting to see subtle differences in the three stages of observation
indicated here. Group 1 concentrated in some detail on their own thoughts
and interpretations. They were very ‘case-centred’, that is, focused on the
patient more than the interaction. Both Group 2 and the experienced ther-
apist paid much more detailed attention to musical events. Group 2 used
more phrases like ‘I think’, ‘it seemed’, ‘I had the feeling’. Group 2 looked
more at the overall process and the quality of the relationship. This was even
more pronounced with the experienced therapist. The experienced therapist
related to theory and was able to balance between an objective overview and
the musical fabric. Group 1’s observations seemed to contain more assump-
tions about the meaning of events than the other stages and looked more at
single events and not the whole process between the partners. The experi-
enced therapist was also able to bring more clinical knowledge of the client
group to the observation as a whole, for example issues about reciprocal play,
about the length of the child’s concentration and about the lack of obses-
sive quality in the child’s patterns.
To conclude, it seems that this simple enquiry showed that the overall effect
of therapy training changes the quality and approach of therapists’ obser-
vation and listening. Trainees move from a preoccupation with discrete events
and a variety of assumptions to a more objective and balanced view of the
Table 10.3 cont.
4
Matching his ﬁrst gesture (on the guitar), which seemed to be this little ﬂash of
activity on the piano.
5
Keeping a similar intensity and feel to what he gave you.
6
Not just the actual guitar matching but also with your voice.
7
Lovely couple of phrases that some went up (sings) with little Spanish type
conﬁgurations.
8
It all then felt quite safe, in those early parts (secure in that way of working).
9
It felt that this was like a coming together again (done before?).
10
Within that frame, your input (though changing) seemed to have a very regular
pulse to it (even rest points felt pulsed).
11
He may be playing in more random ways but you were keeping it very focused.
12
Sang in a more lyrical way, which seemed to interest him; he turned towards
you.
13
Touched a single note with a single ﬁnger and you did a loud, more upbeat and
more excited type gesture.
14
Experimented with longer phrases led into some mutuality, some reciprocal play.
15
Containing shape or space.
16
Dynamically, at the height of the moment when he was the most with you, it
was the time he wrecked it.
17
Quite a lot of concentration for him (2 minutes or so?).
18
Very secure with his little fragments.
19
He didn’t get stuck in his patterns/didn’t get obsessive.

188
Part III Training
whole interaction observed. Trainees at the end of their course and an experi-
enced therapist were likely to notice a range of musical details between the
therapist and patient and to infer suggested meanings from this. Conﬁdence
in making inferences and in keeping in mind a complex picture is clearly
affected by long experience of the client ﬁeld. These ﬁndings seem to bear
out the relevance of Tinbergen’s methods and applying careful simple pro-
cedures for attending to our work.
SUMMARY
This chapter has attempted to identify some strategies for raising the per-
ceptive skills and sense of enquiry in trainee therapists. More specialisation
and reﬁnement of observation will be needed as students develop their clin-
ical work, and it is hoped that colleagues in specialist ﬁelds may be stimul-
ated to take these ideas further. This chapter ends with the thoughts of Thomas
Moore on the subject of ‘observance’:
The basic intention in any caring, physical or psychological, is to alle-
viate suffering. But in relation to the symptom itself, observance means
ﬁrst of all listening and looking carefully at what is being revealed in
the suffering. An intent to heal can get in the way of seeing. By doing
less, more is accomplished.
(Moore 1992: 10)

Chapter 11
Beginning the clinical journey
Leslie Bunt and Sarah Hoskyns
INTRODUCTION
There are many practical questions that preoccupy music therapists both in
training and practice. There are few formulas or ﬁxed prescriptive answers
to these questions but rather we can bring into play a variety of musical/
personal responses and clinical approaches to address them. An experienced
therapist makes a number of seemingly instantaneous decisions during a ses-
sion: for example, whether to play or to attend and listen to the patient with-
out playing; how to engage with the patient’s music; how to work with silence;
what kind of sounds to play; how to engage with any words in the session.
This can all look very bafﬂing to a student, something akin to the ‘women’s
intuition’ articulated by Zeldin in Chapter 2. So how are those decisions made?
We aim to explore some of these questions in a straightforward and
approachable way, using practical exercises, musical illustrations, quotations
and examples from clinical practice. The suggestions in these resource chap-
ters refer in the main to both group and individual practice. We are think-
ing here about the approach and resourcefulness of the music therapist in
general, as applied to various client groups and a range of work. Con-
sequently the exercises are not directed to a particular clinical context but
relate more to the therapist’s own personal and imaginative development 
of resources. There are two groups of sections in this chapter that concen-
trate on beginning the clinical journey: some very basic sound and musical
considerations and some fundamental therapeutic issues and personal
resources. Although presented in separate sections we are very aware of the
integration of both the musical and the personal. We are also aware of over-
laps between this and the next chapter, for example empathy is a fundamental
quality needed not only at the start of the work but throughout all stages
of the therapeutic process.
We anticipate that the ideas in these two chapters can be used ﬂexibly 
for personal practice or adapted to different kinds of teaching, workshop or
training situations. We hope you will pick and choose and play with them.
We divide the sections in this chapter accordingly:

190
Part III Training
The initial musical connection
•
Planning and preparing for the ﬁrst session
•
Silence and sound
•
Quality of the sound and choice of instrument
•
Experience of loudness
•
Use of pulse
Fundamental therapeutic and personal issues
•
Demonstrating empathy and resonance
•
Accompanying, reﬂecting and matching
•
Holding and containing
•
Use of words
•
Some reﬂections on interpretation
THE INITIAL MUSICAL CONNECTION
Planning and preparing for the ﬁrst session
There are a number of issues to consider and decisions to be made before
the patient ﬁrst enters the music therapy room with you. These are rather
different plans to ones made for teaching, with which some readers are 
familiar. They serve the purpose of creating a good working environment
and allowing you to think in advance, avoiding practical dilemmas in the
midst of new work. Spending time thinking about strategies and allowing
time to speak to the team of care staff, therapists or teachers about pract-
ical issues can really assist our ability to provide a safe frame for the work,
though clearly we cannot control for everything. We have structured this 
section as questions and answers, using issues commonly raised by students
and teachers.
Q: Should I ask to see the clinical notes before meeting the patient?
A: This depends on the context and clinical orientation of the therapist. Some
therapists study the notes in great detail and take a history before the ﬁrst
meeting; others prefer not to read them until they have met the patient. The
very nature of music therapy provides opportunities for a whole picture of
a patient to be observed, sometimes with behaviours not observable in other
contexts. However, it is very important to assess any potential risks for pati-
ent and therapist in beginning work. Here reading of relevant background
information and contact with ward staff, teachers and other carers would

Beginning the clinical journey
191
be very appropriate. For issues of health, safety and general care therapists
need to know whether there is:
(a) any physical disability that necessitates special arrangements for posi-
tioning or limits particular movements;
(b) any history of epilepsy or other medical condition such as diabetes;
(c) any visual or auditory impairment;
(d) any history of violent or aggressive behaviour or self-injury;
(e) any conﬁdential issues relating to a history of physical or sexual abuse.
Q: How many instruments should I set out in the therapy room?
A: For individual work it is useful to provide a range of tuned and untuned
percussion (for suggestions see Appendix II). Consideration needs to be 
given to physical differences and restrictions, for example the thin sticks of
beaters may be difﬁcult to hold, and height and accessibility of instruments
may need to be adjusted for wheelchair-bound patients or very small chil-
dren. Remember to provide enough choice but not to overwhelm. If starting
a series of sessions other instruments can be gradually offered in subsequent
sessions. Make sure you are able to offer quality musical support and that
any keyboard or piano is tuned and playable. For group work the same 
suggestions apply except that a sufﬁcient range of instruments needs to be
available for all members of the group to have an instrument. Take care of
providing age-appropriate instruments. Be sure also that you can provide
the same collection of instruments each week, even if not always used, as
patients often evolve a kind of map of the environment in their minds. You
need to be aware of the signiﬁcance of the regularity and familiarity of the
‘tools of music therapy’ as the work develops.
Q: Should I use my own musical instrument in the ﬁrst session?
A: For pianists this question is not too difﬁcult as the piano can be shared
and made accessible to patients. Conversely wind and string instruments, while
having enormous potential in therapeutic work, can present challenging prob-
lems of ownership and accessibility. Therapists get over these problems in
different ways:
(a) placing clear boundaries around their sole use of their own instrument
(make sure your own instrument is adequately insured) – it is OK to say
‘No’;
(b) placing clear boundaries around how the instrument is to be played if
offered to patients;
(c) not using their concert instrument in therapy sessions providing altern-
atives for use by patients, although this opens up dynamic, power and
relationship issues (who has the better or best instrument?).

192
Part III Training
This is a difﬁcult question and we all need to ﬁnd our individual solutions.
As in many issues of this nature it is important to be honest about what is
acceptable personally. Aim to be clear and consistent.
Q: What happens if the patients do not want or are not able to play the 
instruments?
A: We need to appreciate this as a communication in itself. Sometimes the
fear of becoming involved may be a central theme in our work. However, it
is worth considering what is appropriate equipment for patients who are very
disabled; for example instruments that can make sounds with a minimum
of movement, or computer/electronically generated sounds that can be
adapted to the patient’s particular physical needs (see Appendix II for fur-
ther information). We can and do have a role as playing musicians in music
therapy and at times it is appropriate to play on our own to our patients.
We can listen to music together (music has great potential as a ‘co-therapist
in its own right) and we can also be silent together.
Q: Will I harm the patient if I do anything wrong?
A: Patients have ways of communicating what they need from their thera-
pists, however confusing or apparently limited their behaviour may be.
Approaching any new situation is naturally anxiety-provoking but we need
always to listen and observe, taking cues from the patients themselves. We
need to trust ourselves to pick up these cues and begin to build a musical
relationship from there. Sometimes we can ﬁnd surprising inner musical 
and personal resources. The aim is to place ourselves as much as possible in
the shoes of the patient, and to shift the point of observation from pre-
occupation with self to awareness of others. Sometimes patients are in a very
vulnerable state of mind and clearly could be damaged by inexperienced han-
dling. The task of the placement supervisor here would be to choose clients
appropriately for student work.
Silence and sound
Catherine, a character in the novel Grace Notes, sits by the sea ‘lost in her
ears’ absorbing the quiet play of sea and birds. As a composer, she takes
her inspiration from rhythmic cycles of wave and silence. Within her they
take on musical pattern and form (MacLaverty 1997: 213). The natural world
often inspires artists because of inherent balances or contrasts between
space and substance, shadow and light, sounds and quiet and the way they
ﬂow and change. When we begin to improvise our focus naturally falls on
what sounds we will make because of course that is what music is. Or is it?
John Cage’s piece 4’33” famously reminded the musical public that there was
more going on than just the sound patterns. In a thoughtful examination of
his career in music, Sting describes an interesting paradox:

Beginning the clinical journey
193
I’m wondering as musicians whether the most important thing we do is
merely to provide a frame for silence. I’m wondering if silence itself is
perhaps the mystery at the heart of music. And is silence the most per-
fect form of music of all? . . . Great music is as often about the space
between the notes as it is about the notes themselves.
(Sting 1998: 33)
In this section we would like to think about sounds revealed from or dis-
covered in silence. For the improvising music therapist it can be useful to
rebalance our anxieties about what we will play by focusing on space
around and between our notes of music.
Exercises
(i) Sit comfortably in your chair. Take a few slow and deep breaths. On the ‘in’
breath listen to the sounds outside the room. Become aware of them and
then let them fade away on the ‘out’ breath. Repeat this a couple of times.
Now on the in breath listen to any sounds in the room. Be aware of them
and let them drift gently away. Repeat. Now on the in breath focus on the
sounds inside your body. Be aware of them and then let them go. Repeat.
Now let the breath return to its normal tempo and depth as you begin to feel
more and more still, focused and relaxed.
There are many similar exercises to (i) that help develop internal focus 
and awareness. They help us develop clarity, clearing our minds and bodies
and preparing us to listen acutely to what may take place in the session. 
The following exercises help to explore the contrast between sound and 
silence.
(ii) Try and be as still and as quiet as possible. Now make a sound on your out
breath. Use the out breaths to make different sounds and the in breaths to
take in more energy and prepare for the next sound. Explore the contrast
between the two states of sound and silence. This exercise can be done 
by yourself or in a group. Play and experiment with different sounds perhaps
starting with humming then different vowel and consonant-based sounds. Be
aware from where the sounds are coming – your stomach, chest, throat, 
head and so on. What does it feel like to make the sounds? What do the
gaps feel like? How synchronised does your breathing become if working 
with other people?

194
Part III Training
(iii) Finding the sound. In Michelangelo’s theory of sculpture, quoted in Free Play
(Nachmanovitch 1990), the artist starts with the block of stone but is not
cutting the stone into shape and inventing the artwork, but trying to reveal
or liberate the form inside the block. It is already hidden there waiting to be
found by the sculptor’s eye. As musicians, we can think about an unsculpted
block of silence. You can use your instruments or voices for this exercise.
Let us think about what sounds you will reveal or set free in the quiet space.
Concentrate on trying to hear the sounds in the silence – let them ﬁnd you.
(iv) On your own instrument try exploring slow notes played in the same time
frame, sometimes holding the note as long as possible, sometimes with a short
duration and rests. Think about bowing, breathing or just waiting in between
the notes. Think about the rests. If you are a pianist, you could explore this
with or without the sustaining pedal. How is your sound affected by the spaces
created?
Clinical example
Peter, a young child with spastic quadriplegia, has no speech and very little natural
movement. He presents a calm, quiet personality and it is easy to ignore him in his
class at school. In music therapy, the work at ﬁrst seems like an endless void to
the therapist. Peter lies on his back on a mat and watches attentively, but gives
few clues for the therapist to catch hold of. After some bursts of over-energetic
playing and uncomfortable silences, the therapist gradually relaxes a bit and becomes
more comfortable in the space – playing for him gently on a guitar. After a while
she notes Peter’s eyes widening, his breathing becoming more expansive and recog-
nises a change in atmosphere between them. She plays some sounds on a metal
cabasa and then places the instrument on Peter’s tummy and waits. He gurgles
and then smiles in the pause. After a few seconds the therapist rolls some shapes
on his tummy making a little wavy sound with her voice. She stops and Peter seems
to wave his eyelids back to her in response.
Summary
Silences are multilayered and allow us to create our own meanings; sometimes
welcome moments of rest, useful times to balance out sound, but at other times
really anxious and uncomfortable. It was important for the therapist in the
above extract to give the space a chance, to take the opportunity to pay atten-

Beginning the clinical journey
195
tion to Peter. He was much more comfortable with the quiet than she was. Some-
times, music therapists choose not to play at all and to maintain the role of
reﬂective listener. Most commonly this happens in a group where the ther-
apist might step outside the playing in order to observe and to be open to all
aspects of the music. Sometimes it is hard to ‘keep ears open’ when a lot is
going on and we are playing too. There are no hard and fast rules except
being responsible towards our patients. On the one hand we need to be able
to stay with a silence and not intervene; on the other we may need to offer some-
thing to a very disabled patient rather than waiting in a long and tense silence.
Noting the use of silence in musical works gives some clues. It can create
opening frames that heighten our awareness and get us ready to pay atten-
tion to the sound. We can take time to discover how we feel: peaceful, irrit-
ated, sad or furious. Sounds are more poised and focused and more specially
chosen. We can let them draw to a natural conclusion. A favourite exercise
of our teacher Maggie Pickett was to draw an arc with some beautiful antique
cymbals, hit them together and then wait with great attention to the very
last oscillation of the little cymbals. It was dramatic, completely focused, and
allowed her and the class time to reach the natural conclusion. While we did
this time was arrested. It was something she also used very effectively with
her autistic and mentally ill patients. Claire Flower observes that we need a
dynamic and ﬂexible use of music and silence in clinical practice (Flower 2001).
If there is too much silence there is ‘no alliance’: too little and there is ‘no space
for thinking’ or connection between partners. In therapy and in music the cre-
ative use of silence allows us to form a quiet reﬂective space within ourselves.
Quality of the sound and choice of instrument
Upend the rain stick and what happens next
Is a music that you never would have known
To listen for. . . .
Who cares if all the music that transpires
Is the fall of grit or dry seeds through a cactus?
You are like a rich man entering heaven
Through the ear of a raindrop. Listen now again.
From the ‘The Rain Stick’ by 
Seamus Heaney (The Spirit Level, 1996)
We can be captured in a moment by an evocative or surprising sound. The
quality of a friend’s voice may be instantly identiﬁable in their ﬁrst word on
the telephone. We are attracted to particular sounds because they hold
meaning or memory for us, or perhaps there is a real recognition of beauty
for us in the quality of one speciﬁc musical instrument.
Can we think about how we respond to the sound quality and particular
characteristics of the favourite instrument we play? Can you remember the

196
Part III Training
ﬁrst time you heard, saw or touched your instrument? Why do we end up
playing what we do? Perhaps it is primarily an enjoyable physical experi-
ence, for example cradling a guitar and intimately singing with it, sweeping
a bow up and down or gaining pleasure in the ﬁnger dexterity required by
a Scarlatti sonata. Perhaps we love the look of the instrument or just revel
in that particular sound. But at least as important is the linking of outer real-
ity (playing the instrument) and our internal world of feeling and thinking.
Exercises
(i) Within a group, take some time to list and describe favourite sounds. You can
include natural sounds or from a wide spectrum of music. (Perhaps this could
be prepared for in advance and the group could be encouraged to bring some
examples to share). Do the sounds themselves make any special connections
for you? Do they have personal associations? Try not to analyse too much –
just allow yourself to imagine the sounds and react as honestly as possible.
(ii) Take as much time as you want to explore different tuned and untuned 
percussion instruments. Try to approach each instrument as if it was the ﬁrst
time you have played it – for this it is useful to explore instruments from
other cultures with which you are not familiar. Imagine you are a young child
touching the instrument for the ﬁrst time. Itemise your sensations. How does
it feel looking at the instrument, touching and holding the instrument, playing
it, listening to the sound? Do you have any associations or memories that
connect with the sound? Explore single sounds and as many different ways of
playing as possible.
(iii) Play and record a short piece you know well and from memory. After 
listening back with great attention to the quality of sound, describe your 
immediate reactions. Let your imaginations wander and list any associations,
metaphors, images or feelings.
(iv) Try being as inventive as you can with your own instrument. Listen to some
music that exploits contemporary instrumental techniques. Can you bring these
techniques into your improvised playing? Make a list of the sounds you dis-
cover and your reactions to them.

Beginning the clinical journey
197
(v) Try a group improvisation when each person limits their playing to using one
favourite sound. Each ‘sound gesture’ can be repeated as many times as you
like during the improvisation but is often more effective the fewer times you
play – the old adage ‘less is more’ comes to mind. Notice if you tend to play
your sound after hearing another particular sound. What sounds surround
your sound? Are you responding to the sound or the person? Are you aware
how many times you played your sound? Try exploring with eyes closed and
open. Note any differences.
Clinical examples
(i) Group session
At the start of a one-off session the rainstick is passed around a group of cancer
patients and their supporters. This is a way of inviting people to introduce them-
selves to the group. People are curious about the sound. How is it made? What is
inside? Where does it come from? A lot of space and time is taken as each per-
son explores the instrument and makes comments if they wish. There is no rush
or pressure to talk or play. There are associations with the sound of rain on roofs,
the sea moving backwards and forwards across a pebbled beach, waterfalls, rivers,
rain dripping through leaves of trees, breathing. People appreciate the feel and weight
of the rainstick. One member of the group uses the metaphor of the ups and downs
of life as the rainstick is tilted from one side to the other. The group members 
talk of feeling increasingly relaxed and of connections with their breathing. They con-
sider how this sound could be used as a focus for meditation. A gradual stillness
reduces the initial anxious feelings when the group ﬁrst encountered the instruments.
(ii) Individual session
Sophie, a seven-year old girl with moderate learning difﬁculties, has been separated from
her natural mother and is in a temporary foster family. She is preoccupied in her music
therapy sessions with getting the therapist’s violin in and out of its case ‘putting it to
bed’ as she describes it. She compares the violin’s shape with a guitar in the room and 
often asks that they play together, one on guitar one on violin. ‘This is you’ she observes
as the therapist holds the guitar, ‘and that’s me’ pointing to the violin that she has
put back in the case. ‘They are like a Mummy and a little girl’ the therapist sug-
gests, observing the female shape of both. ‘Yes’ says Sophie, taking the guitar from
the therapist, ‘I’ll sing her to sleep’. Sophie sings the lullaby in a mixture of sweet
crooning and rather violent guitar chords (evoking the difﬁculties of being without her
mum?). The therapist is surprised by how easily Sophie uses the instruments like
dolls, but can also switch to playing a range of sounds and music to capture her mood.

198
Part III Training
Summary
Responses to the quality of different sounds are very elemental and often an
initial meeting point in individual and group music therapy (as happens with
the rainstick in example 1). We are dealing here with notions of choice, per-
sonal association and identity. Patients can associate with instruments as objects
and playthings (as Sophie does above), connections being made with their
quality, feel and sensuous power. Association may of course be tenuous; the
person may just like playing, singing and moving, but very often people 
can feel drawn to the colour, shape and feel of a musical instrument. The
meaning of patients’ choices is highly subjective and it may take time in 
therapy to make sense of the signiﬁcance of the instrument for the patient.
Dilemmas or difﬁculties can be explored and thought about and stories told
through the way instruments and sounds suggest things to us.
In conclusion some important issues to note are: allow personal choices
and associations with instruments and sounds to develop; allow free access
for the person’s imagination; encourage playful exploration of sounds and
instruments. They may become signiﬁcant ‘intermediary objects’ or ‘pheno-
mena’ for the patient in the way that Winnicott (1974) and Alvin (1977) have
discussed. They can be helpful props for story-telling in the best imaginat-
ive and therapeutic traditions and give helpful diagnostic data with regard
to the patient’s needs, difﬁculties and personality.
Experience of loudness
The scene is a Prom concert in the 2000 season in early September. Bernard Haitink
is conducting Beethoven’s Ninth (Choral) Symphony. In the ﬁnal movement, as the
orchestra strains to the limits of its wordlessness, the magniﬁcent leonine bass 
John Tomlinson leaps forward to begin the vocal part of the movement. ‘Freude!’
is the word, but the sound is extraordinary. Compared with all the vast resources
of a full symphony orchestra this seems ironically to be the loudest and most intense
moment. How can one bass voice project so loudly? The whole Albert Hall seems
to beat and shake to this amazing call to attention.
In polite society being noisy is not very acceptable. One might think of polit-
ical hecklers shouting, teenagers listening to loud music on a sunny Sunday
afternoon with windows open, roadwork machines creating very high 
decibels and workers wearing earmuffs to protect hearing. The liberation 
and self-expression of one person’s loudness may be a nightmare intrusion
to their neighbour. But where an experience of loudness is shared there may
be a feeling of power and solidarity, of excitement and exuberance, of
energy joyously expelled.

Beginning the clinical journey
199
Clearly loud and soft are on a continuum (like sound and silence) and 
the one exists in balance with the other. In discovering music perhaps one
of the attractions might be experimenting with the control of this dimen-
sion. In therapy there are important associations with being heard, help-
ing people listen, in the release of feeling energy and being comfortable 
with quiet.
Exercises: loud and soft
(i) Improvise either by yourself or in a small group aiming to emphasise loud and
soft sounds. Explore sudden contrasts of sounds. What is it like to begin 
softly and then gradually increase loudness? Alternatively how does it feel to
begin loudly and become softer? What does it feel like to sustain either very
soft or very loud sounds? What about the ending – how does it feel to end
very loudly or softly? Try different ways of playing.
(ii) Listen with your eyes closed to colleagues improvising by themselves or 
in small groups. Be aware of reactions to loud and soft sounds. What 
are your body-based reactions? How is your breathing affected? Repeat the
experience with eyes open and be aware of the links between movement
(strength and size of attack, body gestures and so on) and the resulting 
loudness. How can you describe the sounds? Do you have any associations
or images?
(iii) Explore how composers use this element. Take a favourite piece and use the
composer’s speciﬁc use of loudness as a springboard to your own improvi-
sation. Look at a piece such as Bartok’s ‘Minor Seconds, Major Sevenths’
(Mikrokosmos, Volume Six) where the composer explores a gradual increase
in loudness linked to a decrease in speed and vice versa. Use this example
to explore these connections and what it feels like going against your natu-
ral instincts.
(iv) Combine an exploration of loud and soft with high and low pitches. What 
is it like to play loud and high or loud and low? Compare this with soft 
and high, soft and low. Make an improvisation exploiting one of these 
contrasts.

200
Part III Training
Clinical example
Dan, a very shy and lonely man in his mid-40s, begins to attend a day centre for
adults with mental health difﬁculties and is referred to the music therapy group.
He has been feeling depressed for many years and has had periods in hospital and
two prison sentences, one for shoplifting and a second for sexual exhibitionism. Socialising
is difﬁcult and he is initially very quiet in the group. In the sixth session the impro-
visations are all rhythmic and lively and the group becomes very cohesive and encour-
aging of each other. Somebody offers Dan a turn on the drum kit and to the great
surprise of the group he steps over and sits with feet on the bass drum and high-
hat cymbal pedals and begins to join in the next piece. He plays gently and steadily
to start with but gradually gains conﬁdence. The group shouts encouragement to
him and he begins to grin and gradually builds a tremendous crescendo drum roll,
which ends with an explosion on cymbals. Dan leaps to his feet with his arms in
the air to the whooping and applause of the group. (Exhibitionism perhaps, but in
more acceptable social form?) He bows to everyone and then resumes his seat. 
In a later review of his sessions, Dan particularly remembers this moment to the 
therapist. ‘It was like having my own little party’ he says. ‘Everybody listened. They
all thought it was good’.
Summary
We all have different sensitivity to loudness but loud and soft are part 
of the sound palette available to us in music. A real pleasure for the music
therapist may be in witnessing patients becoming more ﬂexible in this
dimension. ‘Dan’ in the extract above surprises everybody by showing he
has a loud extravagant side to him. He sees himself differently by his ‘exper-
iment’. Alternatively, a young autistic child might manage to sidestep rigid
patterns of beating of drums and cymbal; begin to listen to other sounds in
between and discover the pleasure of linking with the therapist’s melody, which
before has been blotted out. Feeling able to make a loud sound within accept-
able limits; being noticed even when your ‘song is soft’; experimenting with
different levels of intensity: all these can be valuably explored in the music
therapy space.
Use of pulse
Pulse moves from rest, to action, to rest unendingly . . . To grasp it intel-
lectually is so easy it seems like child’s play, but to know it in practice
is to understand it is child’s play.
(Rooley 1990: 117)

Beginning the clinical journey
201
The pulse is a musical hinge. In discovering it we may connect and move.
A collective pulse is often a strong way for groups to form and feel woven
together, as in the clinical example below. But it can also control the time
too strongly, and individually we might resist and want to ﬁght it off. In the
following exercises, play with its presence and absence, and observe how we
compare and contrast our responses with those of others.
Exercises
(i) Take your own pulse and tap it out. If working in a group invite colleagues to do
the same. Enjoy the differences and note the range. Play around with different
pulses, exploring what it feels like to work with very fast or very slow pulses.
(ii) Work in pairs. Take turns in tuning in to each other’s pace of breathing. Make
sure you experience both the giving and receiving parts of this exercise. It can
be done sitting side by side or with the person receiving the attention lying on
the ﬂoor. Make sure both parties are comfortable: if person A is lying then do
so with legs uncrossed, hands held loosely at the side, any belts or constric-
tions loosened; person B sitting or kneeling next to A, taking care not to touch
A and respecting A’s personal space. Person A continues to breathe normally.
B observes A’s movements and breathing pace and adjusts the breathing accord-
ingly. Take care to keep focused with keen attention on any subtle changes
in movement. Synchronise the breathing: as A’s diaphragm rises B inhales and
as it falls B exhales. After B feels in synchrony with A’s breathing B begins to
make gentle ‘ah’ sounds at a comfortable pitch on the out breaths. Continue
exploring any shifts in pitch, loudness or duration of the ‘ah’ sounds as they
connect with A’s out breath. Come to a gentle resting point and discuss the
effects of the process. Swap roles and repeat the exercise. Notice any shifts
in states of mind and report your feelings. When feeding back in this and any
other exercise make sure each partner has sufﬁcient time both in the report-
ing and listening mode (another opportunity to practise listening skills).
(iii) Repeat (ii) but this time the ‘therapist’ weaves a simple wordless melody based
on the pulse of the ‘patient’s’ breathing. Pay attention to any small changes in
tempo and explore different ways of matching with subtle ﬂuctuations in tempo,
phrasing or loudness while trying to keep within the overall pulse of the breath-
ing. Once again swap roles so each can experience this kind of deep listening
and matching. Give honest feedback. Do a similar exercise with instruments.

202
Part III Training
Clinical example: Group work
Let us continue with the story of the cancer patients who have been using the rain-
stick (see p. 197). After the initial explorations everybody is invited to choose a differ-
ent instrument. Some members of the group are very keen to play an instrument that
strikes their fancy and get up to try things out. Others are rather more difﬁdent and
sit back in their chairs, the therapist needing to spend more individual time encour-
aging and pointing out some of the qualities of the various instruments. Here is the
ﬁrst example of being sensitive to the different ‘pulses’ of the group. Some people are
quick off the mark; others need more time. The therapist is also aware intuitively
of an overall pulse of the group at this stage in the session and surmises this to be
quite steady – quite a few people appear rather cautious. The exploration of the rain-
stick has also created a rather reﬂective general atmosphere. Eventually everyone
has an instrument. Some people begin to scrape, tap and explore. The therapist
listens, observes and wonders it there could be an underlying pulse that will unite
these fragments of sounds. A steady heartbeat pulse emerges. The members of the
group are invited to play anything they like, keeping the pulse as a background and
trying to internalise it. There are many smiles as people feel quickly that they are all
playing together, playing in a ‘groove’. Some people appear to want to explore a
faster pulse and some of the foreground changes as different personalities emerge from
the texture. The therapist picks these changes up and introduces a gradual shift in speed.
The group accepts the invitation and also follows a gradual slowing of the pulse.
The rest of the improvisation is a subtle exploration of slow, medium and fast
pulses with more ﬂuidity of direction between members of the group and the ther-
apist. In the following discussion there is a general amazement on how cohesive the
music felt. Some members had been suspecting a general cacophony of sounds with
13 people playing together. The group is pleased with their ﬁrst group piece. The
pulse acts as a holding principle. It helps to create trust right from the beginning.
Summary
Pulse is linked to fundamental human processes. It is the bedrock of all that
helps us to feel held, safe and secure. Without a sense of pulse how can we
predict events in time, a necessity for the time-based actions involved, for
example, in movement and speech and language development? The cancer
patients used playing within the same pulse as a safe container at the start
of a session. They could then emerge from this secure position to explore
more independent and challenging freer improvisations. Here different
pulses could be negotiated as a healthy adult exchange of playing with and
within similar pulses or not, depending on how the music evolved. At times

Beginning the clinical journey
203
in music therapy we meet patients whose particular difﬁculties prevent them
from externalising a sustained pulse. Their sounds appear as disjointed and
fragmented. Here any co-created music with the therapist can help any indi-
vidual or fragmented sounds to be placed in a larger and more evenly pulsed
framework. The therapist can work to ﬁnd connections between the patient’s
fragments.
These reﬂections on pulse, particularly our prime responsibilities of work-
ing to link with an individual’s pulse or ﬁnding the common pulse of a group,
can form a transition to the next section.
FUNDAMENTAL THERAPEUTIC AND 
PERSONAL ISSUES
Demonstrating empathy and resonance
This is not Love perhaps – Love that lays down
Its life, that many waters cannot quench, nor the ﬂoods drown –
But something written in lighter ink, said in a lower tone
Something perhaps especially our own:
. . .
A need for inns on roads, islands in seas, halts for discoveries to be
shared,
Maps checked and notes compared;
A need at times of each for each
Direct as the need of throat and tongue for speech.
(Tessimond 1985: 50)
Human connection, companionship and sensitive relating lie at the heart of
the music therapy frame. Empathy in the most general sense may be to know
how to act as an ‘inn on the road’ or an ‘island in the sea’ for our fellows.
As in the old Eskimo saying, we should not jump to conclusions about a
person until ‘we have walked a mile in their moccasins’. If we use the ana-
logy of music therapy being the giving and receiving of a musical story, then
Okri has some useful thoughts about the listener to the story (the therapist
position). He observes that the listening process importantly involves
‘silence, openness and thought’. While the joy for the teller of the story is
‘artistic exploration’, the joy for the listener is in ‘imaginative identiﬁcation’
(Okri 1997: 48). These ideas seem very in tune with Rogers’ deﬁnition of 
empathy involving ‘being sensitive, moment by moment, to the changing felt
meanings which ﬂow in this other person’ quoted in Chapter 2. They also
suggest active work done by the listener in thought and imagination. We can
demonstrate in the music we play with our patients that we are listening care-
fully and showing this imaginative identiﬁcation.

204
Part III Training
Resonance is a therapeutic concept with a signiﬁcant musical correlate.
Musicians are aware of the resonating capacity of their instruments and the
notion of sympathetic resonance when a string or part of an instrument res-
onates in sympathy with a sound. Different spaces have their own unique
resonating frequency. So it is not too big a step for musicians to be able to
apply this concept to a broader one of resonating with a patient’s music and
feelings, including those dissonant and difﬁcult ones.
Exercises
(i) Work in pairs – neither partner is allowed any words – take it in turns to
lead. You sit together and try through gesture, and posture and any move-
ments to empathise with and reﬂect the feelings of your partner. Swap over
leadership. Try the exercise again also using vocal sounds.
(ii) This exercise is based on John Steven’s ‘Triangle’ from Search and Reﬂect (Stevens
1985: 77). Work in groups of three and choose similar sorts of instruments
(you might have a group of string or woodwind players trying this). Sit in 
an equilateral triangle, imagining that the other two people are your sound
system, and you are playing with the stereo sound you hear. Each person 
does the same in the triangle. You do not start to play until you hear your
‘sound system’ playing: try to feel with the sounds and ‘play what you hear’.
(Breathing, scrapes and any music.) Listen to the different pieces created by
different trios. Try with dissimilar instruments.
(iii) If you are a piano player, look at some of Bach’s Two-part Inventions. Consider
each part as a character, showing empathy to the other, and play it through.
How do the parts mutually complement? Are they exactly the same, what
does the difference in register do?
(iv) In pairs, imagine one of you is the ‘backing singer’ to the other. The main
singer chooses a melody well known to both of you. The backing singer sings
an obligato melody that simply harmonises with the main vocalist. Swap over
and ﬁnd a new melody. Repeat the exercise but improvising the main melody
this time.

Beginning the clinical journey
205
(vi) Work in pairs. Play to each other and be open to where and how you 
experience both playing and receiving the music. Where is the locus of any
resonance – feelings, an idea, part of your body?
(vii) Facilitate a group improvisation. Try to be open to how and where you 
resonate with the sounds. Allow the sounds into your body. Feed back as
honestly as you can. What did the sounds make you feel both physically and
emotionally? How did they inﬂuence your thoughts?
Clinical example: Carla
This wiry and wary eight-year-old, with emotional and behavioural problems, pro-
vided a challenge to the therapist’s ability to provide a safe space and to truly empathise
with her rapidly changing feelings. Carla certainly provoked hard – and the ther-
apist often had the experience of being wrong-footed, feeling cross and frustrated
and certainly insensitive to Carla. (Anger and lack of control were experienced as
counter-transference by the therapist; these were combined with the therapist’s 
own struggle to hold limits.) Carla’s parents had a very volatile relationship, her 
mother often leaving home and her father changing address. Two schools had 
found her behaviour unmanageable.
The therapist worked with Carla for nearly two years, until her father moved on
again. The mutual ‘difﬁculties with boundaries’ remained a feature, though in the
second year it seemed as if they represented more creative opportunities for Carla
(more in keeping with a lively rebellious spirit that needed nurturing, than the rage,
injustice and pain that they seemed to embody to begin with). Carla was small, thin
and athletic constantly needing to be ‘ahead’, always beating the therapist to the
music therapy room. In many ways she was very quick-thinking; fascinated by detail
and perceptive about how things worked, but there was a desperation and panic
in her activity.
The opportunity to empathise came about through the focus on some musical
work together, based loosely around the use of songs and themes from ‘Mary Poppins’.
Carla would often act parts of it, both she and the therapist would sing, and Carla
also improvised on a kind of ‘drum kit’ she put together from mixed percussion.
The therapist played violin and guitar and Carla would impulsively want the violin
on a regular basis. As Carla sang ‘Feed the Birds’ and ‘Chim Chiminee’ the ther-
apist had a really strong sensation that these songs were her feelings, the loss, 

206
Part III Training
the battle with adults, the wish for magical musical powers. Empathy was easy 
then. The violin and ‘Mary Poppins’ took up much of the ﬁrst two terms together
and gradually Carla allowed herself to diversify and to play more freely on a larger
range of instruments.
Summary
Music therapy can work with empathy in interesting ways. The active role
of the therapist in making music with the patient allows for a direct expres-
sion of ‘feeling with’ the patient. Feedback can be shared almost instantane-
ously about the ‘changing felt meanings’ described by Rogers. For further
discussion on musical empathy and resonance see Chapter 2.
Accompanying, reﬂecting and matching
How inspiring for the singer when rehearsing to feel that his partner at
the piano has given the song as much study as he has, knows the poem,
is aware of that awkward corner just approaching, anticipates with 
him – not responding after – to this inﬂexion and that.
(Moore 1962: 199)
To accompany with such ﬂexibility can appear as almost second nature in
the hands of an artist of Gerald Moore’s sensitivities. Orchestral musicians
are also used to accompanying soloists and when playing pure orchestral 
music to moving between a foreground and background position within the
movement of any one piece. Players in chamber and jazz groups regularly
tread this balance between soloist and accompanist. Singers can be in the
solo spotlight or part of a group. In music therapy it is a humbling experi-
ence to provide a musical accompaniment to children and adults as they begin
to narrate their stories in sounds and music. We can begin to know and study
their personal songs and anticipate with them as the musical relationship
evolves. We can work to ﬁnd the kind of accompaniment that is most ﬁtting
to each clinical situation. One day this might be a young child with limited
attention, the next a group of highly articulate adults with acute anxiety and
depression. This property of music to act as an accompaniment yet enabling
the players to feel both supported and free to explore is one of the great gifts
of music therapy.
Reﬂecting is a classic technique in supportive counselling. Reﬂecting not
only the words but also the intonation and quality of the feelings can con-
tribute to a development of trust. The patient feels heard. Musically this can
also be relevant in the early stages of the work when the therapist reﬂects
back using a similar musical gesture to the patient. A negative aspect of this

Beginning the clinical journey
207
technique is the potential slide into parroting with the dangers of sounding
like an automatic response.
We prefer to concentrate here on the concept of matching. Here reﬂection
is used but there is also more active listening to the feelings behind the musi-
cal presentation (in verbal work some counselling colleagues often refer to
listening to the music behind the words). The listening attitude works across
the different modalities. A child plays a series of soft sounds on a xylophone.
The therapist might then match these sounds by playing at the same level
of pitch, loudness and duration but use a different timbre, for example the
piano. This technique of matching is closely related to Stern’s notion of 
‘vitality affects’ (Stern 1985) and Pavlicevic’s development of ‘dynamic
form’ (Pavlicevic 1990; see Introduction to Chapter 4).
Exercises
(i) Work in pairs. A plays an instrument and B accompanies, aiming to provide 
a musical frame for A’s music. The aim is for B to concentrate on providing
a safe atmosphere to support A’s music concentrating on going alongside 
A at A’s pulse and level of loudness. What does it feel like to play alongside
A’s music? Spend time discussing the experience from both musical and per-
sonal perspectives. Swap roles and explore different music and expression of
feelings.
(ii) A plays a short phrase to B; B listens to A and reﬂects back the phrase as
accurately as possible using the same instrument and musical parameters of
timbre, pitch, duration and loudness. How does A feel to have the sounds
reﬂected back? Swap roles and try out different kinds of musical gestures. As
the exercise progresses pay increasing attention to reﬂecting back the kind
of emotional world that is being communicated. Explore this using different
instruments, some similar and some not.
(iii) Continue to work in pairs. Again B chooses a different instrument to A but
one that can easily match A’s sounds – for example wood for wood, metal
for metal, pitch for pitch . . . A plays to B and B attempts in the reply to match
the overall mood of A’s communication. B pays attention to matching the
parameters of pitch, loudness, duration and timbre but is not so pre-
occupied with an exact reﬂection. Explore ways of matching the feelings being
communicated. Again discuss and swap.

208
Part III Training
(iv) Take everything one stage further with one of the pair trying to facilitate the
other’s expression. A plays and B helps to encourage A’s exploration of the
instrument and feelings by putting into practice the accompanying, reﬂective
and matching techniques described above. Discuss the kinds of musical 
gestures and support that facilitated your communications.
(v) Practise facilitating different group improvisations by listening for any musical
common denominators that can help you to make reﬂective well-matched 
interventions.
Clinical example
This example illustrates the themes of this section alongside references to the
matching of pulse and pitch, pacing and the emergence of a meeting and
dialogue in sound.
Louise is sitting head-down in her specially adapted chair. She is 10 years old, pro-
foundly disabled and has no speech. The therapist has been working with Louise 
for six months and has been trying to understand her story by creating accom-
panying sounds that connect to her pace, movements, breathing and level of under-
standing. He has learnt that everything has to be extremely slow – movements,
sounds, gestures – and in effect even slower than what he imagines is slow enough.
Today he starts by observing the tempo of her breathing and reﬂects this by 
playing one long sound on some beautiful Indian bells, a sound that has previously
attracted Louise’s attention. The sound begins from and ends in silence. A long gap
ensues during which time Louise begins to move her head towards the source 
of the sound. After another longish pause he plays a second sound, taking great
care to attend to her breathing and to how long the sound lasts. Again Louise looks
up but this time after a shorter gap. This interaction continues for a while with the
one bell sound. There is the beginning of a smile and Louise makes a quiet and
sustained vocal sound. The therapist matches the pitch, duration and intensity 
of this sound. She makes another sound. The therapist replies with a slightly longer
vocal phrase and incorporates Louise’s name. The vocal sounds within this more
sustained dialogue extend in pitch and length as the pace livens. Looking back 
on video it is clear to see the emerging contact at the child’s pace and level of
understanding.

Beginning the clinical journey
209
Summary
The techniques of accompanying, reﬂecting and matching are fundamental
ways of demonstrating to a patient that the therapist is carefully attend-
ing and listening. We can adapt our music to accompany different personal
stories as patients sing out their individual songs. The quiet pragmatic skills
of the accompanist provide much on which we can draw. It is not a ﬂashy
role in music but its essential underpinning of the instrumental or vocal soloist
makes a skilful accompanist like gold dust. Great musicianship is needed 
to subtly time and tone the accompanying part, and the work of the music
therapist is very linked to this. We draw on all aspects of our musical and
personal resources in creatively reﬂecting and matching what people bring
to us in therapy.
Holding and containing
Softly, in the dusk, a woman is singing to me
Taking me back down the vista of years, till I see
A child sitting under the piano, in the boom of the tingling 
strings
And pressing the small, poised feet of a mother who smiles as 
she sings.
In spite of myself, the insidious mastery of song
Betrays me back, till the heart of me weeps to belong
To the old Sunday evenings at home, with winter outside
And hymns in the cosy parlour, the tinkling piano our guide.
. . .
From ‘Piano’ Selected Poems (D.H. Lawrence 1950: 30)
Lawrence wrote in a letter to a friend of his attempts to ‘get an emotion 
out in its own course, without altering it’ in his writing of poetry (Williams
1950). There are links here to improvised music with the desire for sponta-
neous expression – the wish to not intellectualise but to express in the
moment. In this poem ‘Piano’, a clear part of the observation is music’s power
to evoke memory, but it could also give an idea of its ‘holding’ and ‘con-
taining’ qualities. In Chapter 2, we noted Winnicott’s concept of the mother
holding the baby, emotionally and physically being akin to the therapist 
‘holding’ the patient. Here Lawrence captures the mother as musician, the
child close by under the instrument and the intimacy of the contact. The 
child is held in her smiling song, pressing her foot perhaps to continue or
control the sound.
The music therapist can use the dual function of holding the patient in
mind, as the therapist, and also holding the patient’s communications by the
way music is framed.

210
Part III Training
Exercises
(i) Explore the qualities of different containers either in your imagination or as 
a prepared exercise. Ask members of the group to describe their chosen 
container. In what way does it hold objects, liquids and so on?
(ii) Listen to the Act II Finale of Mozart’s The Marriage of Figaro. Listen to the
way the many motivations of character are held together in the musical struc-
ture. How is this achieved? What musical means does Mozart use to hold the
singers’ parts together?
(iii) In pairs explore ways of holding and containing a range of different emotions.
Person A thinks of a particular emotion, spends a few moments getting into
the role and plays out the emotion. B uses all the musical and personal resources
discussed so far to try and hold and contain A’s music. Spend time discussing
and then swap and try out different emotions. As you feel more comfortable
you may feel able to play what you are really feeling. Paradoxically we ﬁnd
that it is sometimes easier to reach this place of honest communication after
working through a more role-based exercise. Playing as if once removed can
often produce very imaginative and spontaneous playing (freedom within the
structure).
(iv) Explore ways of trying to contain fragmented and disjointed sounds. Long sus-
tained notes or drones may be very effective here, a kind of cocoon of sound
that surrounds. You may like to come back to this exercise after experimenting
with the melodic, and rhythmic suggestions in the next chapter.
Clinical example: Lisa
This little girl aged seven, with mild learning difﬁculties, had a difﬁcult and painful
life, living in foster care after her mother had discovered her sexual abuse by sev-
eral male relatives. Her foster family was caring and supportive but Lisa was deeply
affected by the loss of her mother and the trauma of the abuse. Lisa’s time at
school was landmarked by whirlwind tantrums and crises. She was contained very
warmly and strongly by a teacher and a care assistant but it was enormously difﬁcult

Beginning the clinical journey
211
for her to engage in any one-to-one work, as the intensity was often unbearable.
She was very interested in the idea of coming to music therapy and effectively referred
herself by her constant requests to come. However, rarely was she able to come
at the right time or to stay more than a few minutes in the ﬁrst few months of
work. The therapist fought against the pressure to ﬁll her slot as lots of other chil-
dren had been referred – but was unsure if Lisa could take anything from her.
Then a song came along.
One afternoon, she had not wanted to come and the therapist sat doodling at
the piano, thinking about her and wondering what she was feeling. The tune that
emerged was a Beatles song ‘A Little Help from my Friends’. Initially the words were
not the ﬁrst thought, but the tune just kept revolving around in the therapist’s mind.
She became preoccupied with the idea of the two other staff mentioned earlier and
trying to help Lisa ‘get by’ – and how difﬁcult that task felt. The next week the
therapist told Lisa on collecting her that she had been thinking of her when she
wasn’t there and had a song for her. Lisa beamed, jumped up and ran straight to
the room. ‘Sing me the song, sing it to me, I want to hear it’ she enthused. The
therapist was stunned, having no idea that it would be so motivating. But perhaps
the surprise for Lisa that the therapist had held her in mind, and sung something
for her when she was not there had helped her keep a thread of contact. Perhaps
the therapist could be trusted, or maybe more likely the song itself was trustier. It
was something she could grasp, when she couldn’t ‘get hold’ of people. Something
they could focus on and share together, without so much emphasis on relating to
a person, which she dreaded. She became ﬁxated on the phrase in the song ‘I just
need someone to love’. The song was singing of her needs, her difﬁculties. The idea
of it ‘held’ her when it was almost impossible to do this in person. It also held the
relationship together.
Note: for more discussion of these themes see Chapter 2.
Use of words with music – a continuum
There was speech in their dumbness, language in their very gesture.
Shakespeare, The Winter’s Tale, V.2.13
. . . when anyone speaks to me, I listen more to the tonal modulation in
his voice than to what he is actually saying, what he is like, what he feels
. . . Life is sound, the tonal modulation of the human speech . . . I have
been taking down speech melodies since the year 1897 . . . they are of
the utmost importance to dramatic music.
(Janác
ˇek in Harvey 1999: 49)

212
Part III Training
To use words or not to use words – this is a subject of continuous debate
in music therapy. We propose a pragmatic approach with the use of words
relating to context, an obvious example being the appropriate use of words
when working, for example with groups of elderly mentally ill patients or 
of preverbal children. How each therapist responds and uses words relates
to theoretical orientation. Within our particular styles of work, we would
both encourage students, at the most basic level, to feel comfortable greet-
ing patients and using any everyday conversation as part of creating a
relaxed and safe environment. But anomalies do occur, for example if 
we have already greeted an individual or group member, is this moment 
the start of the session or when the ﬁrst musical sound is made? What is 
the function of the frame of a greeting song if we have already greeted 
people with words? Is the traditional use of ‘Hello’ and ‘Goodbye’ songs in
music therapy therefore only relevant with people of certain ages and range
of disabilities?
The student music therapist requires training in using words so that 
they can ﬂow in and out of the music if this is required. For example a 
pattern that is often used when working in adult psychiatric groups is for
an improvised piece of music to lead naturally and continuously into some
verbal discussion raising awareness of the group members’ feelings about 
the music and each other before returning to some more music. A beginning
student may often feel apprehensive about handling such a delicate process.
Learning some simple counselling skills including the use of reﬂecting and
open questions can help the student begin to work more conﬁdently 
with these transitions. If the therapist wishes to work at a level beyond the
supportive (see therapeutic spectrum in Chapter 2) then further training 
in individual or group psychotherapy, group analysis or other systems is 
recommended.
Clearly the use of words in a therapeutic encounter moves beyond the 
everyday and the therapist needs to take care in handling words. At times
words are redundant in sessions: how often do we feel lost for words after
a particularly moving musical experience? Words can also block or defend
against emotional expression. The elemental nature of music can be a sig-
niﬁcant release for people without access to words. However, the powerful
combination of experiencing feeling in music and subsequent identifying 
meaning in words should be accessible to and valued by music therapists.
We recommend respect for this continuum between words and music and
an approach based on common sense, appropriate clinical techniques and
balanced integration. We would like to think that all students leaving their
training feel comfortable handling verbal material if it arises in sessions and
for any words to be held within a supportive framework.

Beginning the clinical journey
213
Exercises
(i) Improvise some small group pieces. Take turns to facilitate the process and
help the members of the group to discuss their experiences of the music and
of playing together. Be aware of the balance between words, non-verbal sounds
(the very important supportive ‘mms’ and ‘ahs’) and the music. Do any themes
emerge for the development of further improvisation, the words forming a
transition to the next piece of music?
(ii) Practise listening to the sound shapes and inﬂection of speech around you.
How do different people sound? How does sound quality contribute to mean-
ing? It is useful to listen to different languages that you do not understand. Try
this on the Tube in London, or travelling abroad. Go for colour and expression.
(iii) In pairs, try to match some words to your partner’s improvised music. In
contrast offer some music to some free words your partner says. Swap the
playing and the speaking and take turns with both.
(iv) Think of the things your patients say as their own sort of music. Examine the
intensity, pitch inﬂections and ‘voice print’. Improvise some free singing or
accompany a spontaneously invented song in the privacy of your own practice.
(v) Choose a poem that suggests ‘music’ to you (such as e.e. cummings’ ‘In Just-
spring when the world is mud-luscious’ (1960: 1) or Hopkins’ ‘Binsey Poplars’
(1953: 39)) and practise reading it aloud with attention to all the sound qualit-
ies (rhythm, timbre, ﬂuidity). Work in pairs and share your poems. Improvise
a short piece together on instruments inspired by the poem’s sounds. Discuss
how the poem and the improvised sounds relate.
(vi) In a small group try singing a nursery rhyme in three different ways, working
on contrasting styles and instrumentation. How do your different styles alter
the meaning of the words?

214
Part III Training
Clinical example: Jimmy and the ‘Seedmaid’
Jimmy is a fair-haired freckly boy of seven years with a mild learning disability. His
home life is quite deprived and he has three street-wise older brothers. He is ver-
bally ﬂuent and lively and explores the instruments as tools in a variety of cowboy
and army games. His speech is often stern and ‘sergeant majorish’ and he barks
orders to the therapist. It is hard to sustain any music on instruments Jimmy allows
the therapist to play. He is always moving on, like a sound track in fast-forward.
The therapist makes a point of trying to hold on to his verbal ideas and to elabor-
ate on how they sound and feel in little songs, but it is always hard to keep up.
One day, Jimmy asks the therapist to climb inside the soft guitar case. She is
uncertain as quite a lot of Jimmy’s suggestions involve controlling, tying up, things
that feel uncomfortable. However, he says ‘Please. Go on, you can sing. You’re a
Seedmaid’. The words he says are important, he has recognised that she keeps 
trying to put things into music. Also, here is a rich metaphor – the sea, the mer-
maid, the seed and so on. The ‘Seedmaid’ sings for some time on her ‘rock’ in the
middle of the room, a lyrical line, wordless to start with and then something about
being lonely and beautiful. Jimmy jumps up, having been listening quietly. ‘Hallo 
I’m the Seedmaid-boy, can I have the tail?’ Jimmy takes the guitar case and puts
his legs in and sits on the ‘rock’. He sings in a sweet treble voice, of swimming and
ﬁshing and then ‘lahs’ for several minutes. It is the most sustained musical-verbal
exchange they have had in their work together of four months. Words and music
are shared between the partners in a simple easy way. The Seedmaid girl and boy
are then the ‘seed’ of several months of future work.
Summary
We mused about pragmatism at the beginning of this section. Being free to
do what works and what seems to be comfortable for client and therapist is
important. Words and music have always had close allegiance in song,
opera, music theatre and musical. These forms are popular and easily 
accessible and music therapists can make good use of their traditions. Some-
times we might try a kind of recitative (providing a sung commentary to what
is happening); or sprechstimme (inﬂected/heightened speech); at other times
a clear division between the musical period and the talking period is needed.
At another point we may have no words, in another session, no music.
Some reﬂections on interpretation
Interpretation in psychoanalytic work is one of the ways in which the ana-
lyst suggests a link between the present relating moment and a feeling in the

Beginning the clinical journey
215
patient that is not consciously recognised. The use of interpretation needs
awareness, sensitivity and good timing for it to be helpful. Malcolm Pines
makes an interesting exploration of the roots of interpretation, including ana-
logies of language interpreters, ‘translating from one person’s language into
another’s’ (Pines 2000: 138). He also thinks about a musical ‘interpretation’
(musicians are familiar with ‘style and interpretation’ classes in their educa-
tion). Here ‘interpretation’ means one person’s personal view of the music,
their ‘style’ and what understanding they bring. There is much food for thought
in this for the music therapist, for example improvising their understanding
or interpretation back to the patient.
We are getting closer to developing more rigorous interpretation procedures
in music therapy. For example at the recent Naples conference Giacomo
Gaggero and Barabara Zanchi presented their early explorations of integrating
a musical interpretation of events in music therapy within more psycholog-
ical and overriding philosophical frames of reference. On the Bologna music
therapy course the students are encouraged to ‘read’ improvisations on a 
number of planes:
•
the descriptive plane: direct and spontaneous of what actually happens;
•
the resonance plane: more intersubjective, including transference and
counter-transference dynamics and physical/mental/emotional resonance;
•
the symbolic plane: picking up any symbols in their musical guise 
including images and moods and any archetypal, collective, cultural or
mythological features;
•
the stylistic plane: very linked to how the music is used and relating to
speciﬁc and personal form;
•
the rough interpretation plane: insights from the therapeutic encounter
placed in the context of the personal, family and environmental back-
ground (including history of any pathology); insights from the other planes
linking with the music therapist’s intuitions – all moving towards an 
initial working interpretative hypothesis (Gaggero et al. 2001).
CONCLUDING POINTS
We have explored some essential musical and personal resources that will
equip us not only for the start of a therapeutic process but also for contin-
uing the work. We have begun to explore central themes that will form part
of many therapeutic encounters throughout our training and our working
lives as therapists. We now need to turn to some more complex musical
resources for the therapist that will assist in helping patients to continue to
move through the therapy process.

Chapter 12
Developing the musical
journey
Julian Raphael, Leslie Bunt and Sarah Hoskyns
INTRODUCTION
Our focus now moves from simple features of sound and early stages of 
therapy described in Chapter 11 to a series of practical exercises that con-
centrate on more complex elements of melody, harmony, rhythm and form.
The intention here is to attend to the needs of a range of musicians (singers,
guitarists, single-line instrumentalists, ﬁrst- and second-study pianists) pro-
viding shapes and inspiration for practice and useful structures to assist impro-
visation in music therapy. The exercises are obviously relevant at any stage
in the therapeutic process but we give most attention in this chapter to ideas
that help to sustain interaction or move the process forward. In the main,
the musical ideas in this chapter are framed to enable readers without much
experience of improvising with patients to have a try at developing their ideas
and skills; but we also hope more experienced music therapists might ﬁnd
something new to do.
While the exercises are presented in a straightforward musical way, you
may ﬁnd it helpful to keep in mind some of the following clinical questions:
•
How can these elements be used to accompany a person’s music?
•
How can these ideas be used to help sustain focused concentration in
musical play?
•
What helpful musical connections can we make (taking account of the
person’s personal taste, culture and musical experience)?
•
What kind of musical interventions can be used to challenge (when 
appropriate) any obstacles in the ﬂow of interactive communication? For
example a client’s loud continuous playing, repeating obsessive patterns,
continuous beating, fragmented or disconnected moments?
•
How can these exercises be adapted for both individual and group
work?
•
How can these elements be used to help prepare a client for the ending
of therapy?

Developing the musical journey
217
In this way you can make your own imaginative exploration of how the prin-
ciples behind the exercises can be applied in the music therapy room.
The main areas and sub-sections of this chapter are:
12.1 Practical music exercises
•
Common modes
•
Pentatonic sets from other musical cultures
•
Varied starting points for improvisation
•
Accompaniment patterns
•
One-note ‘turnarounds’
•
Simple 12-bar blues
•
Two-chord vamps
•
Rhythmic grooves
•
Exploration of song and accompaniment style: ‘Amazing Grace’
12.2 On listening to music
•
Open listening as part of training
•
On working with individuals and groups
PRACTICAL MUSIC EXERCISES
See over.

218 
Part III Training
3 Common Modes
The Mixolydian mode; white keys G - G, 
with the flattened 7th has a soft, major key 
feel w ithout the functional certainty of 
the raised leading note.
Do 
Re 
Mi 
Fa 
So 
La 
Tor 
Do
The Dorian mode; white keys D - D 
(here transposed to G ) has a minor 3rd 
but a major 6th, which adds a certain 
brightness to the minor tonality.
Do 
Re 
Mor 
Fa 
So 
La 
Tor 
Do
The Aeolian mode; white keys A - A 
(here transposed to G ) has both a 
minor 3rd and minr 6th and can easily 
summon-up melancholy.
Modes can be performed on any instrument, but vocal practice will help tune the ear into 
the different interval characteristics. Modes work well over a tonic drone, while a rhythmic 
ostinato accompaniment can provide momentum and facilitate musical phrasing.
Figure 12.1 Common modes.
F
G
F
G
Gm
Gm
F
Gm
F
Do 
Re 
Mor 
Fa 
So 
Lor 
Tor 
Do
Cm7
Dm7
E^m
aj7
F
Gm

Developing the musical journey 
219
3 Pentatonic Sets
These are some examples of 5 note scales from other musical cultures.
Working with such combinations of intervals will allow the musician to produce distinct 
sound worlds of colour and mood. Remember it is often the notes that are left out that 
give the right flavour and this will need practice. Instruments such as xylophones can be 
prepared to aid performance in the desired mode.
This set of notes comes from the rag system 
of Indian classical music. The scale has a 
bright, spacious character.
maj
3rd
maj
2nd
This set is built on the tetrachord 
system of Japanese scales. This is but one 
combination. Make up more of your own.
The top 5 notes of the harmonic minor 
scale can be used to create melodies 
in the Hebrew style, particularly if 
harmonised like the example below.
Cm
Cm
Figure 12.2 Pentatonic sets from other musical cultures.
Sa 
Re 
Ma 
Pa 
Ni 
Sa
P4th
P4th
min
3rd
min
2nd
D
D
D
D

220 
Part III Training
Starting Points
Even a simple clapping rhythm can be 
made to sound dynamic with a back-beat 
pulse. This makes a good warm-up before 
rhythmic improvising. Make up variations 
or generate call and response ideas.
beat.
Here is one of the oldest of 
West African rhythms, usually 
known as the 12/8 bell pattern.
To play it fluently over a foot pulse 
is rather difficult until you finds its groove.
But keep trying; its rewards are many, as are
its applications and, once mastered, never forgotten.
swing it
Try playing a simple ostinato on 
tuned percussion while clicking 
a back-beat. Swap hands to 
develop balanced co-ordination.
On single line instruments you could develop ideas using 
different scales (see Pentatonic Sets). Here is the start 
of a melody using a whole-tone scale.
steady
Develop your left hand piano 
skills with a boogie bass line. 
You could sing or play some 
simple riffs over it.
Figure 12.3 Varied starting points for improvisation.
foot
clap
This
pat- tern
ends
on
the
finger click
xylophone
va

Developing the musical journey 
221
Dm9
The idea of tension and release can 
be explored in this simple harmonic 
progression (which can be treated in 
the mixolydian mode). Imagine creating 
musical waves that build in intensity over 
Dm9 and subside onto a still chord of G.
Explore pan-diatonic 
progressions that offer 
variations in colour and 
light. Here the right and 
left hands play different 
primary triads in A major.
The cycle of 5ths is in every sense a classic structure for improvisation. This version 
alternates root chords with first inversions resulting in smaller steps in the bass.
As an exercise try creating a variation for each repetition of the cycle.
Dm
Fmaj7
/A
E07/G
Asus4
A7
Here is cadential sequence in a popular style that avoids the dominant chord, using 
instead the triad on bVII and chord IV. Much heard in Beatles songs and Country rock.
G
ad lib
T e d .
etc
C
etc
with a strong beat
F
F
E
^
/F
B
^
/F
F
B
*’
.

222 
Part III Training
Accompaniments
These accompaniment patterns using primary chords are designed 
to develop co-ordination and rhythmic precision. They are suitable 
for both experienced and non-specialist keyboard players.
Work in partnership with a singer, improvising melodies, then lyrics. 
For further challenge, memorise and transpose into different keys.
C
 
F
 
G
 
F
 
F
/G
A basic pop style vamp. 
The silences are important 
so don't use any pedal.
This is the classic Afro- 
Cuban Montuno with a 
Tumbao bass. Tricky at 
first, but very satisfying 
when established.
A Samba-like rhythm can generate energy and excitement when well articulated. 
Try RH pattern 1
 over the bass before the more complex agogo-like 2nd version.
Cmaj7 
C6 
G1
3
 
Gsus9
A more 'traditional' progression 
in this bar would be Dm7 -G7.
Figure 12.4 Accompaniment patterns.
Combining the 12/8 
bell pattern with warm 
Sth African harmonies. 
Enjoy its lilting swing.
C 
F6
 
G 
F6 
C
 
F6 
G
etc
C 
C»/E 
F 
'Dm7»
 
C/6 
6

D eveloping the musical journey 
223
One Note Turnarounds
These examples demonstrate just some ways in which a 
repeated single pitch can be harmonised. The first 2 remain 
diatonic while the last 2 introduce functional chromaticism.
Em7 
Am7
Dm1
1
G7
A gentle sequence that avoids 
treating the G as a tonic.
This sonorous vamp around a repeating tonic has opened many a popular song:
with a strong back beat
G 
G+9/B 
C+9 
D9sus 
G 
GA9/B 
Am7
3rd
G7
C7
F
9
B^3
5th
9th
13th
You will find versions of this 
classic turn-around in Liszt's 
'Liebestraume' and in 'Basin 
Street Blues'.
Notice the relationship of 
the G to each chord.
Contrary motion chromatic lines rising to a 6/4 
are resolved with a typical cadential figure:
Fm9
Em"
&  
6/D
Em7 
A9
D7sus
VI 
II 
V
I
See also "Ein Tone" by Praetorius and Jobim's 
"Samba de Urna Nota" for some alternative 
one note harmonisations.
Figure 12.5 One-note turnarounds.
Dsus
3rd
t
6

224 
Part III Training
Simple 12 bar Blues in E
This is a good key for the blues if you have 
diatonic tuned percussion; just rem ove the 
F and B tone bars and you have an instant 
blues pentatonic scale. The voice, how ever 
is the best instrum ent for blues melodies.
Start improvising melodic shapes with 
just 3 notes from the E minor 
pentatonic scale,
With a gentle swing
A7
B7
Figure 12.6 Simple 12-bar blues.
etc
maybe add the 4th note here,
etc
E7
A7
etc
and the 5th note here.
A7
E7
E7

Developing the musical journey 
225
12 bar Blues in E with a Walking Bass
Over a walking bass line alternate sustained and 'stab' 
two-note chords (playing 3rd and 7th). This keeps the 
texture light and gives a charateristic blues-jazz sound.
Medium swing
A7
Try different right hand inversions and syncopated rhythms. 
Concentrate on the right feel rather than just note accuracy. 
To complete the effect improvise a vocal melody over the top. 
Figure 12.7 12-bar blues with walking bass.
E7
 
A7
 
E7
Walk like a cat in the low octave.
E7
B7
 
A7
 
E7
 
B7

226 
Part III Training
Vamps with 2 Chords
B
C
zone 2
zone 1
Cm9
Dm7
F9sus4
F7
The Bb (m ajor) pentatonic scale 
can be used for instrum ental & 
vocal im provisation w ith all 
the sequences below . Begin in 
zone 1
 and m ove to zone 2 for 
a m ore expressive range._________
Alternating I / V with a 
contemporary sound.
A typical ii / v progression.
Consecutive chords provide a 
useful harmonic start point.
D
(Gm7)
B^l3sus4
The flat 7th creates 
a soft cadence.
Bb
6/9
£t>l3
An exotic brazilian flavour. 
(Flatten the D in the melody 
over the 2nd chord).
These patterns could be com bined 
to m ake longer sequences, e.g:
c —* B —* A —
Vary the inversions of the r.h. chords 
and fit them  to the rhythm ic grooves 
on the next page._____________________
Figure 12.8 Two-chord vamps.
E
E^m
ai7
Bornai7
A
&

Developing the musical journey 
227
Rhythmic Grooves
These patterns can work as 1
 or 2 bar grooves. 
Practise them first away from an instrument to 
establish hand independance._______________
A basic rock 
groove.
r.h.
Played steadily 
with straight 8's 
this will have a 
latin feel.
l.h.
A hint of funk.
Swing the quavers 
and you have a 
reggae lilt.
r.h.
¥
l.h.
U  Utf'LT
Play to a slow 4 
and it will sound 
like samba.
For a 4-bar groove: 
play bar 1
 three times 
then bar 2.
Tempo is important to a groove; 
vary the speed of the beat and see 
what effect this has.
Figure 12.9 Rhythmic grooves.
r.h.
A
l.h.
B
l.h.
r.h.
c
r.h.
D
l.h.
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4

228 
Part III Training
AMAZING GRACE
Arranged by Julian Raphael
A
A 
- 
ma- 
zing - 
grace 
how 
sweet 
the
3
3
sound 
that - 
saved 
a 
- 
wretch 
like - 
me. 
I
once 
was 
lost 
but 
now 
am 
found 
was - 
blind 
but
B
3
now 
I
 
see. 
T'was 
grace 
that 
___taught 
my

D eveloping the musical journey 
229
heart 
to 
fear, 
and 
grace 
my 
fears 
re - lieved;
how 
pre- 
cious 
did 
that 
grace 
ap- 
pear 
the
3
hour 
I 
first 
be- 
lieved. 
Thro' 
ma- 
ny
3
3
dan- 
gers, 
toils, 
and snares, 
I 
have 
al 
- 
rea- 
dy
3
3

230 
Part III Training
There are many creative possibilities when harmonising a simple, well-known 
pentatonic melody. Section A allows space for the melody to breath its natural 
line with pedal points and held notes giving a subtle resonance. Section B, while 
still relying on diatonic harmonies, offers inner movement and counter-melody 
and some chords that are not, at first, obviously consonant with the tune.
The final verse provides some altered harmonies that are commonly associated 
with modern gospel arrangements and help provide interest and surprise.
It is good practice to keep the lead melody out of the accompaniment but find 
ways of supporting and enriching the vocal line through sensitive use of space, 
movement, dynamics and colour.
Take some familiar folk-style melodies and experiment with accompaniments that 
offer changes of mood and texture. Breathe new life into old friends.
Figure 12.10 Exploration of song and accompaniment style: ‘Amazing Grace’.
come. 
Tis 
grace 
hath 
bro't 
me 
safe 
thus
far 
and 
grace 
will 
lead 
me 
home.
3
3

Developing the musical journey
231
ON LISTENING TO MUSIC
Open listening as part of training
A music therapy training provides many opportunities to reappraise our
approach not only to our playing but to listening to music. Some students
might have graduated recently from university courses that stressed an ana-
lytical approach to music listening; others may have experienced many years
of performing or teaching with little sustained spare time for private listen-
ing. We wish to encourage a similar ﬂexible attitude to listening as we have
been doing for the practical exercises. One approach is to start with two kinds
of listening, one analytical and one more metaphorical and feeling-based (with
thanks to Kenneth Bruscia who introduced Leslie Bunt to this approach).
This approach is used here to describe the opening of the famous slow move-
ment of Marcello’s Oboe Concerto in C minor (see Table 12.1).
Doubtless we would have failed our music degrees if we presented a 
version of the right-hand column in our exams and even the left is far from
an in-depth analysis. But we do learn from our patients that it is very com-
mon to speak about the effects of listening with more of these feeling-based
Table 12.1 Opening bars of the Marcello example
Analytical focus
3/4 time: solo oboe and strings; c minor.
A single stream of six slow, repeated
string quaver C’s joined in the next bar 
by the D above for six more pulses. The
dominant 7th chord is spelt out around
the next six quavers. Expectations are set
for the arrival of the solo oboe. It enters
above the continuing pulsating string
texture. The rising melody starts out from
the home tonic grouped in paired quavers.
It climbs in thirds before coming to rest
after a semiquaver embellishment. This
longer sound is supported by slower
crotchet movement downwards in the
lower strings. The oboe starts out again
one tone lower and in sequence. There
are two further sequences, each starting
one step lower, the second with quick
demisemiquaver ﬁgurations. All the
melodic material is related to the opening
musical gesture and so on.
Metaphorical focus
The opening string pulses feel like a
heartbeat and there is a sense of being
cradled and supported. But from the
outset this threnody is not comforting.
There is also a sinking feeling. There are
pulls at the heart as the steps and layers
of sound are added. The oboe solo feels
very poignant. It feels very alone as it
weaves its sad story line. There is some
consolation with the support of the
strings and you feel safe because the
bass is always there.
This story appears in different
versions. It is repeated and elaborated as
more depths, details and complexity are
added. The addition of quicker notes
above the string threnody adds to the
feeling of the emotions being quickened
and intensiﬁed. It feels that you can
almost get inside the oboe and sing your
own story and version of this sad song.

232
Part III Training
comments. It is refreshing to ﬁnd ways of integrating both listening styles.
One way is to use this kind of open listening as a stimulus for an improvi-
sation. Take another Baroque example, this time the slow movement from
Vivaldi’s Guitar Concerto in D major. If we listen analytically we hear a 
slow, dotted, unfolding guitar melody, decorated on the repeats, with long
sustained chords (usually one change of harmony per each bar – simple quadru-
ple time). The form is a simple binary with repeats. If we listen with less ana-
lysis we are aware of an overriding gentle mood, the guitar weaving its melody
as a kind of ‘personal gestalt’. There are few obstacles en route; everything
is calm and serene. The mood is supported by the accompanying strings that
act as a kind of holding cradle, and more so than the Marcello. Students
can then be invited to recreate their own version of this unfolding foreground
melody supported by a gentle slow-moving background with the intention
of creating the same warm and comforting atmosphere.
Other pieces can be used to explore different moods and musical frames.
Here are two different examples.
•
Mother and Son from Trísan explores interactive dialogue between two
main contrasting elements. The piece starts with sampled wind sounds
before a bamboo ﬂute enters in solitary mood (repeated hearings create
isolated images of deserts or mountainous places). A drum introduces
a heartbeat pulse that provides a sense of holding and grounding. The
speed suddenly increases (listeners often have images here of birth itself)
as the ﬂute and drum ‘ﬂy’ together with the odd splash of keyboard har-
monies. The various elements are entwined together.
•
Vocalise from Messiaen’s Concerto for Four Soloists (ﬂute, oboe, piano
and cello) is an interesting exploration of how four voices can maintain
their own identities, yet work together with the support of strings. This
is part of Messiaen’s last work and was composed as a homage to Mozart.
The instruments enter in turn: ﬂute, piano (mostly playing accompanying
arpeggios throughout), oboe, cello before working together exchanging
fragments of melody. There is central ﬂute/oboe imitative exchange; the
cello and piano then lead off the ﬁnal section with the oboe melody and
piano decorations, this time with the celesta adding further colours to
the orchestral texture.
Both simple yet carefully crafted structures provide frames for 
improvisations.
On working with individuals and groups
There are many imaginative ways that short pieces of music can be listened
to with individuals and groups including:

Developing the musical journey
233
•
as an aid for relaxation at the end of a session;
•
inviting patients to bring in favourite music to share and to stimulate
discussion;
•
to provide a stimulus for movement;
•
to provide a stimulus for drawing or creative writing, either during or
after listening;
•
to be a stimulus for further improvisation as outlined above;
•
as a focus for some therapist-directed listening based on such themes as:
a meadow, a doorway, following the course of a river, exploring a house,
climbing a mountain, meeting a wise old person (for practical sugges-
tions on choice of music and further guidance on the use of directed 
listening using such archetypal topics, see Assagioli 1965; Bonny and
Savary 1973; Leuner 1984).
If the therapist chooses to include a listening approach it is important to be
familiar with the music and we recommend listening in both ways detailed
above. There is further discussion on the speciﬁc approach of Guided
Imagery and Music (GIM) in Chapter 15 and the results of some research
including listening in a relaxed state in Chapter 14. We note that there is a
predominance of classical and instrumental music recommended in GIM and
in the suggested texts above. Such music has survived through various shifts
in popular taste and avoids the highly personal associations of much vocal
music. Doubtless as modern recording techniques bring easier access to music
from all corners of the globe, GIM practitioners and other therapists using
listening in their work will be increasingly challenged to explore whether such
music can be integrated into their work.
SUMMARY
This chapter has extended in practical terms some of the very basic exercises
included in Chapter 11. Both chapters offer the music therapist trainee an
introduction into exploring musical and personal resources for use in prac-
tice. We have needed to be highly selective with the intention of presenting
a wide range of options from different musical traditions. We hope that the
suggestions will be used imaginatively and with enjoyment. We end with a
short list of other publications that include practical resources and that we
have found useful:
Pied Piper: Musical Activities to Develop Basic Skills – John Bean and
Amelia Oldﬁed, Cambridge University Press (1991).
Creative Music Therapy (pages 215–225 and Appendix I) – Paul Nordoff and
Clive Robbins, New York: John Day (1977).

234
Part III Training
Healing Heritage: Paul Nordoff Exploring the Tonal Language of Music –
edited by Clive and Carol Robbins, Gilsum, NH: Barcelona (1998).
Making Music with the Young Child with Special Needs: A Guide for Parents
– Elaine Streeter, London: Jessica Kingsley (2001).
Creative Jazz Improvisation – Richard Michael and Scott Stroman, London:
Stainer and Bell (1990).
Creative Music in Group Work – Christopher Achenbach, Bicester: Winslow
Press (1997).

Postscript to Part III
Leslie Bunt and Sarah Hoskyns
We add the voices of our interviewees as a postscript to this section and a
bridge to the next. All four are trainers themselves and here are some of the
themes introduced during their interviews.
Jean Eisler contributed a great deal in the early days of the profession in
setting up clinical placements for students. In this way she felt that she was
supporting Sybil Beresford-Peirse who was directing the Nordoff–Robbins
course at that time.
I was so convinced by the rightness of this approach that I felt that what was import-
ant was to develop as a music therapist myself, but also to support Sybil in the
work she had started with students. We needed placements. Places where they could
develop in their own way. In fact, one of the last things Paul Nordoff said to me
the week before he died, when I visited him in hospital, was: ‘I’ve done my work
here. It’s up to all you people to carry it on and develop it’. He was giving us the
freedom to do it. It was important to be told this. There were to be no frozen idols
and theories, however inspiring.
Helen Odell-Miller referred to the central importance of the music in music
therapy.
Although I’ve been committed to using psychoanalytic theory to inform my work there
might have been a danger up to the last couple of years of the music getting lost.
. . . When you are training students that has to be central. . . . I think that music has
something quite particular to offer where other things don’t. . . . To give an example
one might learn in one’s training that you should always follow the client’s music.
What do you do when you go into a room and there isn’t any music? There is the idea
that you have to wait but you could wait for ever for one sound. My feeling is the
work is through the music and it is also about the therapist using their own music.

236
Part III Training
One of Elaine Streeter’s strong concerns is the importance of experiential
music therapy for music therapy students.
How can you know about the client’s point of view in music therapy unless you’ve
tried to express yourself in your own way with a music therapist supporting you?
. . . Students come out of a music therapy musical experience and begin to under-
stand how this could be important for somebody. It’s something about valuing the
profound nature of your own work, not just that it’s a good thing to do or it might
help, but actually experiencing something for yourself through music in music ther-
apy. . . . When students go through this process they may be able to get to a moment
or a music that helps them to understand themselves or to help them express 
something. It takes them on a journey of self-expression or self-discovery. Once 
you’ve been there with people and done that then you have a tremendous belief
in it . . . But if you don’t know who you are in music, I mean in improvisation, then
you cannot know what inﬂuence you are having on your patients. If you don’t know
the parts of yourself that are problematic – the obstacles in the path of expression
within music – if you don’t know what those obstacles are that you put in the 
way of expression then when you get to improvise with your client there may be
potential difﬁculties.
Tony Wigram has experience of both the British training courses (as place-
ment supervisor, guest lecturer and external examiner) and of many courses
in other countries, in particular his work at the University of Aalborg in
Denmark. While he recognises the importance of training people later in life,
as commonly practised in the UK, he does view the shortness of UK post-
graduate training as a current weakness.
. . . one or two years is a very short time in which to pack in all the elements required.
And I have become very aware of that since working on a ﬁve-year training course
in Denmark.
SUMMARY
These comments from our four interviewees stress some of the important
themes of this section: the central aspect of music within training; the
importance of the clinical placement to which all aspects of any training must
relate; the need for time to integrate all the diverse elements and for some

Postscript
237
kind of sustained personal therapy during training (ideally music therapy),
which is now a mandatory requirement of state registered training courses.
In the next section of the book we begin to explore areas that are import-
ant to the emerging music therapy professional.

This page intentionally left blank

Part IV
Professional life

This page intentionally left blank

Introduction
Leslie Bunt and Sarah Hoskyns
Our four interviewees were asked for their opinions of the current status of
British music therapy both nationally and internationally.
This is Jean Eisler’s reply.
I think it’s come a long, long way but we still have far to go persuading everybody
that music therapy can play a vital part in a child’s development. We can now get
music therapy included in a child’s Statement of Special Educational Needs, but by
now it should be a more automatically promoted form of therapy when needed. In
my experience music therapy has often profoundly helped children and sometimes
this has led to schools setting up their own music therapy post.
I think in general, we have a very good name internationally. I wish people would
include more of the music in conference presentations, because that is what con-
vinces people of its effectiveness. On the whole it seems to me that there is an
overbalance of theoretical and written material and that it really needs to be backed
up with the music and the music-making.
There is a very wide spectrum of music therapy approaches now. Also many of
the children we work with are from various ethnic groups. We need to draw in a
wider range of ethnic musicians to come and join us in the work.
Helen Odell-Miller thinks that:
Politically it’s in a good state with the state registration of music therapists coming
together with other arts therapists, joining the Council for Professions Supplement-
ary to Medicine (CPSM).
Elaine Streeter feels it difﬁcult to judge the real status of music therapy 
in the UK since she is free to work in areas that interest her. She thinks 

242
Part IV Professional life
the situation would be different if she had just emerged from a training 
course.
Some graduates ﬁnd it difﬁcult to survive on music therapy work alone, although
that, of course, may be a good thing. Doing too much too quickly can be over-
whelming. There are just not enough jobs. I can see from our professional perspective
that things are getting better – state registration, supervision schemes and all these
things . . . but out in the workplace, it is still very hard . . . I think that we’re reﬁning
and deepening our professionalism through extended training but I’m not sure 
that our culture as a whole is moving on. I think it’s pretty much that we need to
identify what already we know is effective in music therapy and push for further
provision nationally – one area is pre-school children. There are many other areas
where research is beginning to show effectiveness in statistical terms. Good research
is essential in moving the profession forward.
Tony Wigram considers that:
Our status is in many ways strong but in many ways weak. We accept good musi-
cians and try to help them apply those skills. We have a career structure and state
registration, therefore we have a good status and potential for people to see there
is a good career in music therapy. Our methods are based in improvisation and
psychotherapy and these give us great ﬂexibility in our approach. Also there are
some diverse approaches used and a wide range of applications clinically.
We haven’t developed enough methods of assessment compared to other pro-
fessions. We would be much stronger if we had some standardised forms of assess-
ment. To determine if somebody is indicated for intervention is very haphazard and
individual in music therapy. Evaluation and research is another big area of weak-
ness. When people describe their work they don’t give enough information about
the data from which they are drawing their interpretations. They don’t give enough
detail about their music material to give an idea about how they came to the con-
clusions they came to about the clients.
Internationally, I observe different impressions from different places. In Europe 
a lot of countries regard our work at a high level because it is a postgraduate 
profession. We have a long history, run successful conferences and produce good
publications. Perhaps we are regarded as one of the leaders in music therapy because
we have eminent and pioneering spirits like Priestley, Alvin and Nordoff and Robbins.
In the USA perhaps there is the feeling that we don’t have enough research or a

Introduction
243
strong enough theoretical base for our work but American colleagues may be com-
ing from a very different point of view. However, I think people are attracted by
our psychotherapeutic approaches. Many courses in the USA are more ‘method’-
based. Perhaps British music therapists should be more aware of the work that goes
on in other countries. It’s noticeable in British publications that there is not enough
reference to international writing. But I think it’s getting a lot better now.
This section of the handbook focuses on the life of the professional music
therapist after training. We shall discuss the practicalities of job creation,
referral and assessment, supervision and further training (Chapter 13);
introduce some current debates in research (Chapter 14) and explore the 
processes of transformation that occur in Guided Imagery and Music – one
possible option for further training (Chapter 15). We shall end by tying up
some loose ends and looking forward to music therapy’s development.

This page intentionally left blank

Chapter 13
The professional music
therapist
Leslie Bunt and Sarah Hoskyns
INTRODUCTION
What happens after our student music therapist has successfully completed
training? What are some of the issues out there in the rather more indepen-
dent and risky atmosphere of the working environment? Gone is the inten-
sive support of course tutors and the student group. Some of the challenges
involve ﬁnding enough suitable work, learning how to sustain a therapeutic
relationship over a longer period and how to bring established work to a
suitable close. We begin this chapter by exploring some questions that often
arise during the newly qualiﬁed therapist’s early employment. We review some
issues relating to referrals, assessment and report-writing and discuss the 
importance of regular supervision in learning to manage the therapeutic 
relationship. Continuing education protects the therapist against ‘burnout’
and some common routes for further training and support are identiﬁed. We
conceived this chapter as a transition from training to work: some sections
are geared to new professionals; others to more seasoned practitioners and
supervisors.
SOME COMMONLY ASKED QUESTIONS
Q: Where can I ﬁnd out about music therapy jobs?
A: Your best route is the professional association’s regular job list (see address
of APMT in Appendix I). There may be some general therapy posts adver-
tised regionally either through local press, health or social service channels.
Sometimes posts in schools requiring qualiﬁed teacher status and a therapy
qualiﬁcation will be advertised nationally. Other advertised positions will 
be either contracted employment within the Whitley Council Career and
Grading Structure (Senior I, Senior II and so on) or freelance work at a 
sessional rate. The APMT can advise on all current rates of pay and scales
of employment.

246
Part IV Professional life
Q: What happens next?
A: Read the advert carefully, it will give you procedures to follow. Some
employers use standard application forms; others invite letters of applica-
tion. You will probably be asked for a curriculum vitae and to supply names
of referees. If you have just trained, one referee could usefully be a course
tutor or supervisor, and the other someone who has known you personally
or professionally for a longer time. Be prepared to give reasons for your inter-
est in the job and to describe what you could offer to the post. It is very
important to check the job description carefully and to ensure that you cross-
reference it with your own statement. Take time with this. The points you
make are likely to be explored should you be short-listed for interview. Prepare
the application in a thorough and professional way, keeping a photocopy of
your ﬁnal version. You may need to make several rough drafts and consult
colleagues. In the present job market there is a great deal of competition and
both the content and the way the application is presented go a long way to
secure you an interview.
Q: What can I expect to happen in an interview?
A: This varies. It is becoming common practice to be asked to give a short
audio or video presentation of your work (for which you must have con-
sent). Standard questions for all candidates often focus on: personal back-
ground; analysis of strengths and weaknesses relating to the particular post;
your estimation of music therapy’s contribution to the client group includ-
ing assessment and review procedures (you could also refer to relevant
research or evidence from colleagues’ practices); your own relevant clinical
experiences and knowledge of institutional practice. Here are some practi-
cal tips:
•
only take up an interview if you are genuinely interested in the position;
•
ﬁnd out as much as you can about the post by going on a visit, talking
to other staff, consulting webpages and so on so that you can talk with
assurance;
•
be enthusiastic;
•
imagine what the interviewers might want from you: to interact with 
you, to feel conﬁdent that you fulﬁl the criteria and could do the 
job;
•
gauge your responses: be communicative but do not bombard; keep a
balance between personal feelings and a professional stance;
•
be mindful of the kind of person needed for this job, for example some-
one who is reliable, consistent, a good communicator and teamworker.
•
make sure you prepare some questions to ask.
Q: How do I go about creating my own job?

The professional music therapist
247
A: This is quite a common route in the UK and, if you are used to the life
of a freelance musician or teacher, you should know that this will take time
and require determination and persistence. Ask yourself what work really
excites you, your interests may have shifted since training. As the mytho-
logist Joseph Campbell so often suggests ‘Follow your bliss’. It may be pos-
sible for one of your training placements to develop into a professional position,
particularly if you have set up the placement yourself with the support of
the course team. Otherwise we assume that you will want to set up some
work near to where you are living. Here are some practical pointers:
•
introduce yourself to local music therapists and your APMT area group;
•
your colleague(s) can give you introductions to helpful sources of work
or potential openings;
•
make use of any personal contacts, always preferable to blind
approaches;
•
a short phone call can help you establish whether an approach would
be welcomed, to whom and at what level of management it should be
addressed;
•
offer to visit to explain brieﬂy about music therapy and to get a feel for
the setting;
•
could you imagine yourself working there?;
•
if so, offer to facilitate a staff workshop or present some case material;
•
think about preparing some promotional material but also look at
existing handouts from other centres, colleagues and the APMT.
Q: If I get as far as an invititation to speak to staff and run a workshop, what
do I do?
A: You could call on a more experienced therapist to assist you and this can
add more weight. If this is not possible try to enjoy the challenge. The staff
should be curious to learn but will not want a long-winded and jargon-based
lecture (any supportive or research-based material could be included in a hand-
out). Put yourself in their shoes to imagine the kind of material that would
be of interest. You probably will be given a precise time slot during a busy
working day so do respect the time boundaries. Make sure you have con-
sent if you are presenting video or audio material and check the availabil-
ity of equipment. We suggest you aim to make your presentation lively,
breaking up any talk with examples and overheads to clarify your main points.
Your enthusiasm for the work will go a long way in convincing your poten-
tial colleagues of the importance of the work. Use musical instruments and
encourage the staff to explore so that they can imagine their clients playing.
Supportive group skills and some simple structures will promote security in
the workshop group (see examples in Chapter 11). Remember to leave time
and space for questions and discussion.

248
Part IV Professional life
Q: If I get to the stage of having some work, what must I sort out?
A: Consult the information supplied by your professional association about
contracts, rates of pay and insurance. If you are to become an employee make
sure you are given a contract (however part time or short term) and study
the small print carefully in relation to terms and conditions of pay, sickness
cover and holiday allowance. Ask about any pension scheme that you may
be entitled to join. Are the lines of management clear both clinically and admin-
istratively? Is regular clinical and managerial supervision built in to your 
contract? If not, can it be? Make sure you are satisﬁed with all of these 
arrangements. Take responsibility for checking your state registration.
If you are self-employed ascertain that the agreed fee is within the range
recommended by your professional association. If not then it is your per-
sonal decision whether to accept the position or not. Check the lines of 
management and the referral procedures. Ask for a letter of engagement 
outlining the agreed terms or a self-employed contract. Seek an accountant
to help you with your tax and ﬁnancial returns. Set up an income and expen-
diture book, either by hand or electronically. Keep receipts for everything
connected with your music therapy sessions including instruments, travel, 
training courses, stationery and professional memberships (state regis-
tration, APMT and so on). Ask your accountant whether you could get 
any tax allowances for using your home as an ofﬁce.
Whether employed or self-employed you will need to check insurance cover,
in particular professional indemnity. This will protect you in the unlikely event
of any legal case being brought against you for an accident occurring dur-
ing a session. You will need to insure your own instruments and any other
equipment if you use it for work purposes.
Q: I only have a day a week at this centre and already have far too many refer-
rals. How do I prioritise?
A: Look seriously at the amount of time available and number of people
you can comfortably see in the time. Conveyor-belt music therapy is not a
productive experience for either patient or therapist. Make sure you build
in sufﬁcient time in between sessions for taking notes and preparing the room
and yourself for the next session. Remember that as a therapist you are 
also being paid to observe, think and discuss with other staff. Have proper,
regular breaks and try to really use them. To avoid further pressure, create
some criteria for prioritising referrals. You can back up your criteria with
research that provides supportive evidence, so keep up with your reading of
the journals and other literature. Agree on the number of individual and/
or group sessions you can manage comfortably in a day. How many people
do you want in a group? Be aware of the support that working with a co-
therapist can offer.

The professional music therapist
249
Q: How can I protect myself against future ‘burnout’?
A: David Stewart carried out a survey that included questions relating to
job satisfaction. There were 126 respondents, representing over half of the
number of music therapists in the UK in 1997 to his survey about the state
of the music therapy profession. He identiﬁed the following factors that helped
keep people happily in employment: peer contact (46 per cent), organisational
context (40 per cent) and personal and professional development (14 per cent).
The top eight ranked support networks were: individual supervision; good
communication with parents and carers; informal opportunities to share work
with music therapists; further training; attendance at conferences and work-
shops; reading; meeting with others from related professions and formal oppor-
tunities to share work with other music therapists (Stewart 2000: 19).
A further pattern conﬁrmed by Stewart’s survey is for music therapists to
combine different positions or to continue with instrumental teaching and
performing. Only 16 per cent of Stewart’s respondents worked full time with
the average number of days per week being just under three and a half. What
is encouraging was that 82 per cent of respondents had been able to secure
sufﬁcient work for themselves since training.
We hope that this series of general questions and answers will help to raise
awareness and set up good habits for practice (for further information, see
the APMT Information Handbook). We now need to discuss in more detail
some managerial and administrative aspects of the work before considering
the management of the therapy process itself.
REFERRAL, ASSESSMENT AND REPORT-WRITING
We are now assuming that our new therapist is in a post. Referral and assess-
ment now become important issues.
Referral to music therapy
Music therapists often create their own referral forms. They share some gen-
eral features: factual information about the client; means of contact for par-
ent, next of kin, signiﬁcant other, care worker and so on; relevant medical
information and name of GP/medical supervisor; reasons for referral; and
note of any other agencies involved. Some therapists also include some 
general guidelines about music therapy and some criteria for referral. We
include an example of a referral form for adults (Figure 13.1). A form for
children might also include details of the child’s position in the family, any
recent family changes and nursery or educational provision. A self-referral
form might be similar to Figure 13.1 listing the person’s doctor and any other
professional involvement rather than ward or centre contacts. It is common

250
Part IV Professional life
Name ……………………………………
Date of birth……………………………..
Address………………………………….
Next of kin………………………………
…………………………………………...
Daytime telephone number…………….
…………………………………………..
…………………………………………..
Telephone number……………………...
Hospital ward/community centre etc……………………………………………….
Key worker……………………………...
Telephone number……………………..
Medical supervisor (e.g. psychiatrist)………………………….
Reasons for referral
Referred by……………………………..
Relationship to patient/client……………
Contact telephone number……………
Date of referral………………………..
Has the patient/client been consulted?……………..YES/NO
Name and address of general practitioner…………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………..
Telephone number…………………………………………………………………
Brief medical history
Other relevant information
(e.g. history of epilepsy, diabetes, sensory impairment, challenging behaviour, current
medication and any recent changes)
Other professional involvement (e.g. speech therapy, physiotherapy)
Current life situation
Name of contact for sharing of any conﬁdential information........................................
Funding source: health service, education, social services, private, charity, grant, research
etc.
Number of sessions contracted……………………
Figure 13.1 Referral form for adults.

The professional music therapist
251
practice to inform the doctor of any self-referral. The person making the self-
referral is invited to sign the form and to agree the fee and length of initial
contract. A further form is included regarding consent for audio and/or 
video recording of sessions (Figure 13.2). It is advisable also to prepare a
withdrawal of recording consent form.
Assessment in music therapy
Following referral, normally there is a period of assessment to ascertain 
the appropriateness of music therapy. This is only one kind of assessment:
procedures can also be used to evaluate a particular stage in the work, to
gather evidence as part of a research project and for reports for other pro-
fessionals, or to examine the conditions for ending therapy. In 2000 the
Spring/Summer issue of the Journal of Music Therapy was published along-
side Music Therapy Perspectives as special issues on this important area of
assessment. In this section we begin to introduce this complex ﬁeld and review
some of the themes raised in these publications.
The art therapist Linda Gantt in her special feature ‘Assessments in 
the Creative Arts Therapies: Learning from Each Other’ raises these key 
questions:
•
What are we assessing that other related ﬁelds are not or cannot?
•
What can we devise that would be a creditable addition to the battery
of existing psychological and psychiatric tests?
•
Are there generic assessments that could be applied to any population
or setting?
•
Are we able to demonstrate that we have reliable and valid instruments?
•
Do our assessments mean anything to others besides those of us in the
particular discipline?
(Gantt 2000: 42)
Gantt points out that these questions are similar to those raised previously
in music therapy publications by Isenberg-Grezda (1988) and Bruscia
(1988). What seems to be underlying these questions is a need to devise more
of our own speciﬁc assessment tools and ones that are reliable and valid (points
highlighted by Wigram in the Introduction to Part IV). For many years music
and the other creative therapies have relied on standardised assessment 
procedures from outside our disciplines, as observed by Gregory (2000) in
her review of ‘Test Instruments Used by Journal of Music Therapy Authors
from 1984–1997’. Non-musical behaviours were more readily assessed than
musical ones with the adaptation of standardised checklists to include some
music-based features occurring in some studies.
Gantt infers that a ﬁrst priority is to be clear what we are exploring if 
we are to create our own assessment tools. Some of the issues in compiling

252
Part IV Professional life
Statement of Intent
It is the policy of (enter name of centre or therapist here) to seek consent to record 
music therapy sessions on video or audio. This is to enable the therapist to monitor 
and evaluate sessions and to use them for further study and supervision. Consent is also
being sought separately to use the recorded material for student teaching, research and
presentations at professional meetings and conferences.
The video/audio material will be kept in a locked cupboard and will not be made available
within the general public domain (e.g. media, the Internet).
Name of patient/client……………………………………………..
Address and telephone number………………………………….
……………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………
Consent for audio/video for monitoring sessions by therapist
YES/NO
Consent for audio/video for further study and supervision
YES/NO
Consent for audio/video for teaching, research and presentation
YES/NO
(please delete as appropriate)
Signed…………………………………………..
Please print name……………………………….
If signing to give assent* on behalf of the client/patient please indicate relationship
…………………………………………………….
Address and telephone number (if different from above)
………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………
Countersigned by therapist…………………………………..
Please print name……………………………………………
Date…………………………….
* Where it is difﬁcult for the client/patient to give personal consent it would be necessary to
obtain assent from a person close to the client/patient.
Figure 13.2 Audio/video consent form.

The professional music therapist
253
standardised assessments outlined by Gantt and others in these publications
include:
•
the rare cases of autistic savants and people with neurological damage
with exceptional musical or artistic talents (for example Sacks 1985);
•
the notion of musical intelligence as developed by Gardner (1985);
•
further individual differences in music creating notorious difﬁculties in
creating any developmental proﬁle in music;
•
the lack of any standardisation and difﬁculties in using musical beha-
viours to evaluate so-called non-musical behaviours such as motor 
control and self-expression, although Wilson and Smith (2000) found 
some evidence of their use;
•
the intuitive kind of assessment used by experienced clinicians, tuning
in to areas of clinical importance;
•
the reluctance of many practitioners to reify and put into boxes aspects
of the musical and therapeutic process;
•
the challenge of using any preset categories in both open-ended and 
rigorous ways;
•
the overriding question of whether to concentrate on the non-musical
behaviours as manifest in the music or to focus on the speciﬁc contribu-
tions of music for aiding further understanding.
A few assessment procedures that have evolved from within music therapy
have been published and are therefore available for other colleagues to use, even
if they fall short of the rigours needed for standardisation. Early examples
are the two scales charting a child’s communicative responses and relation-
ship with the therapist published by Nordoff and Robbins in Creative Music
Therapy (Nordoff and Robbins 1977) and Edith Boxill’s ‘Continuum of
Awareness’ designed for work with the developmentally disabled (Boxill 1985).
One of the most commonly cited references relating to music therapy assess-
ment, is the Improvisation Assessment Proﬁles (IAPs) devised by Kenneth
Bruscia and included in Improvisational Models of Music Therapy (Bruscia
1987). The IAPs can be used generally in different contexts and can be adapted
for both individual and group work. They are extremely comprehensive with
six overall proﬁles itemised by Bruscia: integration, variability, tension, con-
gruence, salience and autonomy. Tony Wigram has adapted the two proﬁles
of autonomy and variability to develop a speciﬁc assessment tool for his diag-
nostic work differentiating between those children on the autistic spectrum
and those with some other pervasive developmental or communication dis-
order. In reference to the two proﬁles Wigram states:
Autonomy helps one look closely at the interpersonal events that are
going on, particularly the readiness of a child to work together with a
therapist, take turns, share and act as a partner, or their propensity 

254
Part IV Professional life
for resisting suggestions or becoming overly dependent. Variability can
illustrate at an inter- and intra-musical level the child’s capacity for ﬂex-
ibility and creativity, or evidence of a child’s rigid or repetitive way of
playing that might support a diagnosis on the autistic continuum.
(Wigram 2000: 17)
Wigram uses this method clinically in diagnostic assessment. There are 
limitations and he refers to the inherent subjectivity, potential observer bias,
lack of any real inter-observer reliability and external validity. The richness
of the music therapy interaction is reduced to a few manageable areas. Again
this introduces more individual bias and subjectivity. To return to one of
the opening questions – what material is selected?
Descriptive analysis using narratives rather than checklists or charts is the
focus of a model of music psychotherapy assessment proposed by Joanne
Loewy. ‘Essential to the understanding of a music therapy experience is 
the recognition of how one assigns meaning to an experience through the
process of translation and interpretation’ (Loewy 2000: 47). She outlines the
ongoing conundrum that using purely musical terminology to describe a music
therapy process does not include the psychotherapeutic context and vice versa,
using the terminology of psychotherapy precludes the details of the creative
musical experience. She recognises the dearth of music therapy description
from within the clinical music therapy experience. As we discussed in Chap-
ter 1 there is still this polarity between viewing the work through other 
theoretical and psychological lenses or focusing on the music. We still need
to ﬁnd a language or languages to describe the music therapy experience from
within our own discipline, an experience that integrates both the musical and
other perspectives.
In her work on assessment Loewy itemises 13 areas of enquiry that form
part of both structured and free-ﬂowing music therapy experiences in a 
variety of different clinical settings. The selected areas are: awareness of 
self, other and the moment, thematic expression, listening, performing, col-
laboration/relationship, concentration, range of affect, investment/motivation,
use of structure, integration, self-esteem, risk-taking and independence.
These particular constructs, which seem to include both musical and more
psychological and therapeutic perspectives, evolved over extensive periods
of study, research and wide clinical experience. They are nevertheless still
very subjective and, as Wigram commented on his own assessment proce-
dure, lack reliability and validity. Each area could be construed differently
by different therapists.
Colin Lee attempts to bridge the gap between clinical issues and the musi-
cal content of a session by a detailed analysis of the ‘musical building blocks
of improvisation as a means to better understand the intricacies of the pro-
cess’ (Lee 2000: 147). His nine-stage method of assessment includes listening
to recordings of music therapy improvisation by the therapist, patient and

The professional music therapist
255
outside observers, such as a musician or psychotherapist. In various stages
holistic and very speciﬁc listening approaches are used, followed by nota-
tion and identiﬁcation of signiﬁcant moments, before all areas of the pro-
cess are brought together and discussed. (Chapter 8 by Sloboda and Bolton
uses an approach akin to Lee’s scheme.)
We end this section where we began by referring to Gantt’s study. She
concludes by advising her readers to work towards validating various
assessment tools. She proposes we move from a personal and subjective choice
of what we assess to a more objective viewpoint. We can start by still being
intrigued by the kind of signiﬁcant clinical material highlighted in Lee’s
approach. We can then explore whether such behaviours are unique to that
individual or could correlate or not with other individuals within a similar
clinical population or in other areas. Gantt suggests starting with designing
assessments for speciﬁc clinical populations and then carrying out some 
correlation studies with more general ones, although we still see this as being
fraught with methodological problems. Can we work from within music ther-
apy itself ? Can we observe different behaviours across the lifespan? Can 
we always be open to change and inspiration while respecting the need for
external reliability and validity? Such complexities have prevented us from
including any examples of generic assessment forms at this stage in the evo-
lution of music therapy.
Some pointers on writing reports
Institutions such as hospitals and schools have different needs and traditions
in the writing of reports and arts therapists need to be aware of how the
clinical team manages reports in general. It is good practice to make sure
that we write reports in time for all reviews of treatment and to provide a
report of assessments undertaken. If there are no formal requests for reports
by managers we need to make our own policies on the regular evaluation
and appraisal of our clinical work. We can ensure, for example, that we issue
annual or six-monthly reviews of treatment and pass on a record of our work
if a patient is moved from our service or leaves under natural conditions.
This kind of report for institutional records is different from the detailed
in-depth case studies that students often undertake while they are training,
or for presentation at a conference when qualiﬁed (see Chapter 10 for dis-
cussion of case studies). Such a case study is perhaps as much for the prac-
titioner (to process their thinking, to study in depth their approach, to collect
together notes, to share with tutors or members of the music or arts thera-
pies profession) as for the reader. The report for the patient’s notes or ﬁles
is usually for a multidisciplinary team, and perhaps for the family or patient
to see and therefore needs to be written accordingly, minimising jargon and
technical terms and perhaps including some brief material that explains the
nature of music therapy.

256
Part IV Professional life
Watchpoints
•
Be aware of who will read the report, for example: nursing or teaching
staff, clinical psychologist, social worker, head teacher or parents.
•
Be sensitive to issues of conﬁdentiality, and consider what is appropri-
ate to write (put ‘CONFIDENTIAL’ at the top of the report particu-
larly if using the patient’s name and identiﬁcation details).
•
Be concise – ideally a ﬁle report should not be more than two sides of
A4.
•
Use short clear sentences where possible, with a minimum of technical
terms. The aim is to be lucid and communicative in writing.
•
Try to prepare the report in advance of a meeting so that everyone has
a chance to read it.
•
Attach a department brochure explaining the aims and procedures of
music therapy or include a short paragraph for readers who are new to
this work.
General suggestions for areas to include in a report are:
1
name and age of child or adult and date of report;
2
number of sessions, their frequency and time of day;
3
minimal background, for example referral, previous treatment, any per-
tinent issues for the patient;
4
aims of treatment;
5
how the patient presents – aiming for clarity and including some des-
cription of the sounds within the music room;
6
an evaluation of the period of work;
7
recommendations.
The following example of a ﬁnal music therapy report was written for a dual
purpose:
(a) to be part of a review of a child’s future educational provision;
(b) to form part of a clinical review to aid diagnosis.
CONFIDENTIAL
Name: Jane Robson
Age at time of report: 8 years 6 months
Date of report: 11 June 2001

The professional music therapist
257
Final Music Therapy Report
Jane was referred to music therapy by her consultant paediatrician when she was
5 years 4 months for exploration of her complex communication and emotional
difﬁculties. She has attended a local music therapy centre for weekly individual
music therapy after school for eight blocks of twelve sessions.
Jane has been highly motivated to make music, concentrating for extended per-
iods with sessions lasting up to 45 minutes. She handles the various musical para-
meters with sensitivity, ﬂexibility and sustained attention to detail with particular
curiosity in soft and low sounds. She does have an acute hypersensitivity to sounds
with problems ﬁltering sounds that can create extreme anxiety, high arousal levels
and at times physical rigidity. She has a vivid imagination and a highly developed
idiosyncratic language that can create isolation and misunderstanding. She has difﬁ-
culties at times reading the responses of others, making social interactions prob-
lematical, often approaching adults in an overfriendly and uninhibited way. She is
emotionally hypersensitive often creating a misrepresentation on how people view
her, particularly if she does not have full sight of faces. Jane appears to have a poor
self-image and lack of conﬁdence, particularly in areas where she fears failure.
The initial aims of music therapy were to:
•
help to reduce anxiety;
•
encourage imaginative play;
•
boost her self-esteem;
•
provide an outlet for emotional expression.
Jane has achieved a great deal in her music therapy and appeared to gain much
pleasure from her creative work. She developed a very close and trusting rela-
tionship with her music therapist. She began to ﬁnd ways of monitoring her levels
of at times quite disempowering anxiety when she understood that she could 
be in control of the levels of sound and nature of the musical activities. This 
included predicting changes in her own sounds and those of the therapist.
Creating stories in music, her own songs and theme-based improvisations built
on her rich imagination, private language, symbolic play and musical intelligence.
This all helped to boost her self-esteem. She was aware that the time and space
were for her, a safe place for her feelings to be externalised and acknowledged.
She brought a wide range of emotions to the sessions. At times her music was
lively, joyous and excited; at other times she articulated themes of fragility, fear,
abandonment and isolation in the music.
Her mother noted her progress towards the aims of the therapy. She observed
the growth in Jane’s sense of play, fun and use of imagination. These developments
were beginning to be transferred to areas of her life outside of the sessions.

258
Part IV Professional life
Recommendations
Music therapy has been beneﬁcial for Jane in building on her strengths, boosting
her self-esteem and providing a safe place for expressing her needs and complex
emotional world. Clearly her whole self is very present in the music. Besides the
speciﬁc beneﬁts of any future period of individual music therapy, more regular
exposure to individually tailored music-making is recommended to her teachers
as a means of developing her general learning. Regular music sessions would be
advantageous to a child with Jane’s range of strengths and difﬁculties. Such a strat-
egy may be more beneﬁcial than to continue in a social environment where the
main day-to-day emphasis is on numeracy, literacy and other spatial tasks, the very
areas and difﬁcult tasks she ﬁnds confusing.
This report was used in making recommendations for future schooling, the
ideal being a school for exceptional children like Jane with small classes and
regular one-to-one adult support. The report was also used as an aid for 
diagnosis when it was considered that Jane’s particular constellation of dif-
ﬁculties resembled the behavioural characteristics of Williams Syndrome (WS).
She does not have any of the physical features associated with WS but does
appear to share some similar psychological features.
ENDING THERAPY
‘Jane’, described in the report above, was being reassessed for her educa-
tional provision. Views from everybody involved in her care were being sought
in order to gain a full picture of her development. She had received music
therapy over a three-year period and the music therapist was beginning to
feel that they had met some important goals and that a review of the way
forward was needed. In this way, both an external reason (the possible school
move) and the therapist’s own appraisal suggested that it was relevant to
consider bringing the work to a suitable ending. The preparation of the above
report was an important stage in the process. The therapist felt the need to
appraise the work and to review how far general aims in music therapy, such
as developing imaginative play, conﬁdence and communication had been
realised. In fact the therapist was able to arrange for a transitional stage when
Jane began to build on her musical curiosity with a series of therapeutically
oriented piano lessons with a colleague trained both as a teacher and 
therapist.
In An Introduction to the Therapeutic Frame, Gray makes a link between
evaluation and ending in verbal psychotherapy. She notes that the therapist
needs some objective measures to assist in deciding to bring therapy to a close.

The professional music therapist
259
We can look for evidence that our clients are overcoming some of the
difﬁculties they have told us of: the relationship with the therapist may
be the crucible for change but it is when our clients report improved rela-
tionships in the world outside that we begin to know that they are truly
helped by their afﬁliation with us.
(Gray 1994: 135)
In ‘Jane’s’ case developmental goals had been achieved at the end of the 
three-year period as well as progress in communication and relating and this
helped the therapist to decide about the appropriateness of ending. Gray 
also gives emphasis to the therapist’s role in containing anxiety, both one’s
own and the patient’s, particularly in the move towards ending. She dis-
cusses ‘having to manage my own guilty feelings regarding abandonment and
broken promises, and not avoid them’, and notes that her patient valued being
told directly and honestly the therapy would end. If we leave a post in order
to move on to other work, we have a responsibility to be thoughtful, to try
to give our patients time to adjust and most of all to be honest about part-
ings; that is, not avoiding ‘the reality of leaving someone by taking refuge
in rationalization or reassurance’ (Gray 1994: 136)
Gray discusses the preparation of ending for verbal clients. Music thera-
pists often have the challenge of trying to communicate about an ending 
to clients with few or no verbal skills. This brings a new area of anxiety;
how far does the client understand that this will happen? Perhaps the 
most important issue here is our own intention, that is trying to make the
best attempt possible to get the meaning across that there are only a limited
number of sessions left. Many therapists use physical counters (a chart or
calendar with stars/stickers or photos) or colour in squares to count down
each session, and ensure that other staff are aware of difﬁculties that might
be encountered after the work has ﬁnished.
In summary here are some general implications for ending a period of music
therapy:
•
We need to have a thoughtful approach to this process and to think about
how to communicate as clearly as possible to non-verbal patients.
•
We need to take into consideration the patient’s experience of loss and
to imagine how ending the work will be received by the patient.
•
We stressed in Chapters 1 and 2 the importance of ‘relationship’ in music
therapy. Ending relationships involves anxiety and pain, on both sides.
We must bear this in mind and provide a safe frame for managing the
parting.
•
How far is this decision on our terms? Can the patient be consulted or
involved in the decision appropriately? It is our ethical responsibility to
work in the best interests of the patient.

260
Part IV Professional life
•
A careful appraisal of the period of work, considering whether issues
have been worked through or resolved and some aims (if applicable) have
been met should happen before the decision is ﬁnalised.
•
Appropriate time should be allowed to prepare for a thoughtful ending.
This allows a range of feelings to be expressed and for the patient to
have an opportunity to react. Be aware that sometimes circumstances
are beyond our control (a patient is moved hurriedly) and we may just
need to do the best we can.
•
How does this possibility link with the patient’s other experiences? Is
there a natural set of breaks (as with the school change); if so does this
make it easier for the patient or will it mean losing everything at once?
•
How does the patient’s whole ‘package of care’ work? Negotiation with
other staff and carers will be important to get the balance right.
•
Endings can be good, appropriate and an opportunity to move forward
and to have new experiences.
THE NECESSITY OF REGULAR SUPERVISION
At the end of the question and answer section above we noted how
Stewart’s survey itemised individual supervision as the most valued system
of support. When we ﬁrst qualiﬁed there was no supervision scheme in place.
We needed to seek out colleagues from other disciplines such as psy-
chotherapy. As the profession has matured so has the growth of a group 
of experienced clinicians to act as supervisors. Before turning to some dif-
ferent models of supervision now available to the music therapist we can chart
the development of the supervision scheme in the UK by turning to the voices
of our interviewees.
Jean Eisler talked of early support groups (in the 1970s) organised at the
Nordoff–Robbins Centre by Sybil Beresford-Peirse and of her work guid-
ing newly qualiﬁed therapists at her places of work. She does not describe
this guidance as supervision per se but we can regard it as a kind of men-
toring or apprenticeship.
From very early on Sybil Beresford-Peirse insisted that we had regular groups. It
was not a therapeutic group but it was run by a psychotherapist and we brought
problems we had experienced in our work and how it affected us. Sybil ran the
development of those years very soundly . . . I felt that my job during all those years
was to support her to enable it [the Centre] to grow . . . I stayed in charge of the
work at Goldie Leigh [the setting for the ﬁrst Nordoff–Robbins course in 1974] at
Sybil Elgar and later at Queen Mary’s, Carshalton. Over the years, we had the

The professional music therapist
261
opportunity to have about 25 students for their clinical practice and observation
work there. We didn’t call it supervision then and it wasn’t really. I think quite an
important thing was the fact that we weren’t so close to the course and that we
were working outside. That made it possible for us to develop ourselves and to be
free, in a sense, to move on from what we learnt strictly on the course. We needed
to learn to apply it.
Helen Odell-Miller also needed to look to other disciplines for inﬂuence and
supervision.
A major inﬂuence was Dr Graham Davis who was the ﬁrst psychoanalytic super-
visor that I had. He was a biodynamic therapist as well as a Freudian analyst and
he loved music. He could listen to improvisations and tapes and have quite a good
notion of what was going on, coupled with the fact that we set up an arts thera-
pies supervision group. The other music therapists in the group could help him
inform the musical part of the work but also I learnt a lot from other arts thera-
pists. I think that’s been crucial.
A travelling scholarship in 1984/85 gave Elaine Streeter the opportunity to
study supervision schemes in other countries. At that time she was director
of training at Roehampton Institute and was concerned to ﬁnd ways of devel-
oping specialist music therapy supervision for newly qualiﬁed therapists in
particular. When asked about her contributions to music therapy Elaine replied:
I think the supervision issue is an ongoing contribution. That came from my
Churchill Fellowship in the USA and Canada on supervision for music therapists. On
my return I decided to try to instigate a post-diploma supervision scheme. I took
this idea to the APMT where it was met with a lot of interest. Helen Odell, who
was the chair of the APMT at that time, was keen to work with me on this. We
decided to form a sub-committee and came up with a number of different sug-
gested schemes. Each one was met with a wave of resistance from the professional
members. We continued on our surfboards until ﬁnally we managed to get it across
that the introduction of a supervision scheme was not intended to make people feel
undermined but to help the profession grow. That’s something I’m proud of and is
now really pretty much established.

262
Part IV Professional life
In his interview Tony Wigram considered post-diploma supervision as a
strength of current music therapy practice in the UK. He compared this with
similar developments in the USA.
Another real strength is the development of post-diploma supervision. There is a 
lot more emphasis in this country on therapists continuing to seek guidance and
support for their work. In the USA you can’t sustain your Board Certiﬁcation if you
can’t prove that you are having ‘Continuous Music Therapy Education’ – this is very
good. That is not so typical in other countries.
Hopefully students will have had a positive experience of supervision dur-
ing training both from placement supervisors and within the course in small
group and individual sessions. There may also have been some experience
of peer group supervision.
During training supervision will have been both supportive and educational,
for example a supervisor supplying some information about a patient’s con-
dition or teaching a speciﬁc musical intervention. It is likely that there will
now be a transition to a model that has less emphasis on the educational
and more on ‘thinking with’ the supervisor. The focus may develop more
towards independent thinking and consideration of managerial and team
dynamic issues. We deﬁne music therapy supervision so:
Supervision in music therapy is an interactive process between a practi-
tioner and a more experienced colleague, concentrating on musical,
practical and dynamic issues. There is a mutual shared interest in the
work with the central emphasis on the practitioner becoming more
effective in working with clients. Through the establishment of a clear
frame of meetings, the supervisor facilitates open and honest articula-
tion of material arising from the work. The process takes place within
a context that is both supportive and critically reﬂective.
We focus more now on the supervisory process and a supervisee can expect:
•
conﬁdentiality;
•
to be supported in a safe, consistent and boundaried space;
•
to be given focused attention;
•
to be given reassurance and encouragement to explore reactions to the
work including difﬁcult feelings and areas of vulnerability associated with
helping people: fear, inadequacy, distress, prejudice, over-identiﬁcation
and so on;
•
to be given any appropriate information or recommended reading;

The professional music therapist
263
•
to be assisted and inspired with the musical ‘nuts and bolts’ including
the practical management of the setting;
•
to explore the musical process in practical and imaginative ways;
•
to help further our own personal style of work;
•
to be challenged over any preconceptions or rigidly held beliefs;
•
to explore our reactions to the setting and interpersonal dynamics with
team members;
•
to further the development of our own ‘internal supervisor’ (Casement
1985);
•
clear boundaries on the difference between supervision and personal 
therapy;
•
clarity regarding ﬁnancial and contractual arrangements.
As we continue our discussion of supervision we shall be drawing sub-
stantially on the process model of supervision in Supervision in the Helping
Professions (Hawkins and Shohet 1989) and be referring to the work of
Casement (1985), Dass and Gorman (1985) and some thoughts on music ther-
apy supervision by Brown (1997) and Dvorkin (1999). We concentrate here
on the one-to-one encounter centred on clinical work, while being aware of
the existence of other kinds of supervision such as managerial support.
Our newly appointed therapist needs to be familiar with the therapeutic
orientation of the supervisor. It is likely that a supervisor who works, for
example, within a humanistic or psychodynamic framework as a therapist
would use this frame as a supervisor. The particular orientation of supervi-
sor should be common information; the APMT, for example, publishes a
list of approved supervisors with details of each supervisor’s style of work
and range of experience. It is in our interests to be open to new approaches.
This is particularly useful in exploring what Hawkins and Shohet describe
as our ‘blind spots, deaf spots and dumb spots’ (ibid.: 48). Their process model
of supervision can be divided into three main areas:
(a) a case-centred approach when supervisees bring material that focuses on
the detail of sessions and the content of the work;
(b) a therapist-centred approach when supervisees focus on their own feel-
ings, interventions and processes;
(c) an interactive approach when there is a detailed exploration of processes
in the relationship between patient and therapist as possibly mirrored
in the relationship within the supervision process.
Hawkins and Shohet describe this process model as involving two interlocking
systems: the system that connects therapist and client and that of the super-
visor and supervisee. A music therapist might start by concentrating on what
happens in sessions: the music played by the patient and the presenting 
problems. Attention here could be drawn ﬁrstly to the interventions made

264
Part IV Professional life
by the therapist, what music the therapist played or how any words were
managed, and secondly to the dynamics of the therapeutic relationship
including both conscious and unconscious processes. Shifts can be made
between these different worlds of client and therapist. The supervisor can
also help the supervisee to begin to explore counter-transference issues.
We are fortunate as musicians in being able to explore a musical solution
to a psychological or therapeutic obstacle. Some examples are:
•
the supervisee is invited to improvise around the feelings about a par-
ticular client or stage in the relationship;
•
the supervisee explores what it feels like to be in the client’s shoes 
by playing as if the client, with the supervisor taking on the role of 
therapist;
•
using ﬂexible exercises to allow the supervisee to shift position from client
to therapist, playing the kind of music typical within each role and gain-
ing insight into how the roles relate from a number of perspectives;
•
exploring alternative methods for handling personal dynamics or spe-
ciﬁc incidents within the therapy.
The process model unfolds to include an exploration of the relationship 
in the supervision as it might mirror the happenings on an unconscious 
level within the therapy. This can provide very useful insights, as can super-
visors being open and honest with their own counter-transference feelings
and images. Hawkins and Shohet consider that good supervision shifts
between these different levels using a technique they deﬁne as ‘helicopter 
ability’:
This is the ability to switch perspectives; to be able to focus on the client
that the supervisees are describing; to focus on the supervisees and their
process; to be able to focus on your own process and the here and now
relationship with the supervisees; to be able to see the client within their
wider context and help the supervisee do likewise; and to see the work
within the wider context of the organisation and the inter-organizational
issues.
(Hawkins and Shohet 1989: 37)
Hawkins and Shohet place their process model within larger organisational,
professional, social, cultural and ethical constraints. There are broader eco-
nomic, religious, political and cultural backgrounds of both patient and 
therapist to consider. In undertaking any form of supervision we come face
to face with our own ﬂaws, weaknesses and issues, some of which may over-
lap and be explored in our personal therapy. This brings us to consider the
notion of the ‘wounded healer’ (for further exploration, see Pavlicevic 1997
and Priestley 1994 in particular).

The professional music therapist
265
The most familiar models of who we are – father and daughter, doctor
and patient, ‘helper’ and ‘helped’ – often turn out to be major obstacles
to the experience of our caring instincts: they limit the full measure of
what we have to offer one another. But when we break through and meet
in spirit behind our separateness, we experience profound moments of
companionship. These, in turn, give us access to deeper and deeper levels
of generosity and loving kindness. True compassion arises out of unity.
(Dass and Gorman 1985: 20–21)
This example taken from a training-level supervision group demonstrates the
three areas of the process model proposed by Hawkins and Shohet.
During group supervision two students presented an assessment session when they
worked as co-therapists with an elderly patient.
Case-centred level
One of the students placed the work in the context of the patient’s life and institutional
setting. The patient was described as very withdrawn and non-communicative; these
were the main reasons for the referral. The supervision group watched the ﬁrst part
of some video ﬁlm when the initial focus was on the musical material and musical
relationships between the patient and the student therapists. The group realised
quickly that the musical preference of this so-called withdrawn patient was in fact
very lively and loud. There was sustained drum-playing, which one of the students
supported at the piano. The supervisor asked how the students negotiated the 
roles of co-therapist. In this stage of the assessment session it was clear that one
student acted as the main musical support with the other student working along-
side the patient. This dynamic was altered quickly by the patient who pointed to
each therapist in turn to indicate when she wanted to hear their music, either harp
or piano. Each adult in the room played in turn. There were few words but much
exchange of gestures.
Therapist-centred level
The supervision moved away from preoccupation with the content into more reﬂec-
tion on how the two therapists felt within this dynamic. It was clear to the group
that the dynamics were shifting and that the patient was having a powerful inﬂu-
ence on the therapists. This was made more apparent when the patient accepted
the invitation to join one of the therapists at the piano and then eventually to play
there by herself. The unfolding of this elderly patient’s personality was clearly felt

266
Part IV Professional life
and acknowledged by the two therapists. They were very moved by the speed of
this process. They were excited and felt warm feelings towards this elderly lady who
could have well been the age of one of their well-loved grandmothers. What was
also of note (and linked to the process model outlined above) was that the dynamic
within the therapy room began to inﬂuence the atmosphere within the supervision
group.
Interactive level (therapy/supervision)
The group was meeting in the evening at the end of a tiring day. The mood shifted
with the level of excitement almost palpable as this mirrored the emerging feelings
of this patient coming alive in the music. There was a rapid increase in the num-
ber of comments and reactions, with at times many people speaking at once. Clearly
the relationship between the students and patient had become transferred into the
supervision process. The group left in an uplifted mood, full of enthusiasm to observe
that music can act in such a transforming and powerful way.
Sandra Brown’s 1997 paper provides a thorough discussion of perspectives
from Hawkins and Shohet integrated within Casement’s notions of the
holding frame and containment. She presents a multidimensional picture of
the work in music therapy supervision ranging from an emphasis on the musi-
cal relationship in the therapy room, through practical issues of management,
interpersonal dynamics in both the therapy room and the working environ-
ment to the dynamics within the supervision process. Brown emphasises the
multifaceted and ﬂexible nature of the music therapy supervisor and regards
musical tools of being of high value in gaining insight. Dvorkin also high-
lights these two areas as being helpful to restore conﬁdence in rather demor-
alised and overworked clinicians and those who are not so familiar with a
more analytical approach to supervision (Dvorkin 1999). Like Dvorkin, Brown
points out that as music therapists understand more about therapy, often
through their own personal therapy journeys, there is an increasing focus 
on dynamic issues within supervision. While being aware of professional 
boundaries, Brown encourages a delicate approach to the diversity of roles
within a small profession. She is not averse to seeing a close colleague or
offering a cup of tea but carefully thinks how to manage this with integrity
and professionalism.
Flexibility, containment, musicality and imagination: these are features 
in the supervisor’s approach that can help the young professional to feel 
understood and foster conﬁdence, growth and change. A good experience
of supervision can help develop Casement’s signiﬁcant concept of the 
‘internal supervisor’. There is a growing internal process with the voice of

The professional music therapist
267
the supervisor being merged with the therapist’s own reﬂective and independent
observations.
The growing importance attached to music therapy supervision is indicated
by the recent publication of a speciﬁc text edited by Forinash (2001).
FUTURE ROUTES FOR EDUCATION AND
TRAINING
Further training was itemised as the third most important factor con-
tributing to job satisfaction in Stewart’s survey (2000). At present there is
no advanced specialist clinical training after basic diploma and Master’s
qualiﬁcations in the UK, although there are moves to do this at the centres
where the courses are based, for example the recent validation of a Master’s
in supervision at Anglia Polytechnic University. Until advanced music ther-
apy training becomes established colleagues will continue to seek out varied
additional training elsewhere. There are several common patterns in the UK.
One group of colleagues, after a period of general practice in a variety 
of contexts, have gravitated towards a specialist ﬁeld, for example: autism,
neurology, palliative care, sexual abuse and forensic psychiatry. They have
become associated with making a contribution within that area and become
known both nationally and internationally through their teaching, presen-
tations and publications (see Chapter 1 for examples). Further education
options present themselves within that particular speciality through attend-
ing conferences, extra training and more personal study and reﬂection.
Some of this group may move into the next pattern that we have observed.
This second group is a smaller one of those music therapists who have
decided to embark on some research in relation to their chosen area of 
speciality within the ﬁeld. The work may develop into a research degree or
form part of a collaborative project with colleagues working within the same
ﬁeld but from different professional perspectives. A rapid learning curve has
been necessary here as to date, with the exception of the bolt-on Masters’
courses, there are no courses in the UK speciﬁcally related to teaching research
methods in music therapy. We have both had to seek out speciﬁc research
supervision for our own work as music therapy researchers. There are 
some moves to address this lack with research seminars and conferences being
delivered at City University, London, the Nordoff–Robbins Centre and the
University of the West of England to list three recent developments. The 
tradition is much more highly developed in the USA (Wheeler 1995) and also
elsewhere in Europe with research centres at the Universities of Aalborg,
Denmark, and Witten Herdecke, Germany and in Nijmegen, The Nether-
lands, for example. Once again this group of therapists has become asso-
ciated with their research through publications and presentations both
nationally and internationally.

268
Part IV Professional life
A third group is made up of those music therapists who have chosen to
ﬁnd additional training from outside music therapy. After an initial period
of work a need for further learning becomes a prerequisite and colleagues
have sought further insight into their work from other perspectives. Some
music therapists have embarked on extensive and costly additional training
in, for example, child psychotherapy, counselling, psychology or adult psy-
chotherapy. There have been many professional advantages to this trend both
for the individual therapist and for the profession as a whole. Both Streeter
and Wigram commented in their interviews about the nourishment of their
training in other disciplines, psychotherapy and psychology, respectively, as
well as keeping their musical selves alive. Streeter commented:
Once you start thinking about the person as well as the music in a big way then
you’ve also got to think about yourself, you as a person, you as a musician as a
creative artist. Equally important have been my own adventures into creative work
outside of music therapy, in the live theatre, in the dubbing theatre, in the ﬁlm edit-
ing room, as a writer and currently as a student of architecture. These experiences
keep me thinking about creative processes and hopefully keep my teaching fresh.
And Wigram:
There are also the continuing inﬂuences from musical life outside music therapy,
for example my church choir inﬂuences. Music therapists should always sustain 
their musical inﬂuences and their music experiences. I have always done that by
playing in opera orchestras and being a church organist. These areas are a big 
part of my life.
One fundamentally music-based further training route is Guided Imagery 
and Music (GIM). GIM was created by the music therapist Helen Bonny
and involves listening to speciﬁc programmes of recorded music in a deeply
relaxed state. Some of the transformation processes of GIM are discussed
in Chapter 15.
SUMMARY
In this chapter we have introduced areas that need to be addressed as the
recently trained therapist moves out into the profession. We have looked at

The professional music therapist
269
some practical questions and discussed referral and assessment procedures
and report-writing. We have particularly stressed the importance of super-
vision. We have indicated some opportunities for further training, develop-
ment and education in the UK. In the next chapter we now focus on one of
these areas, namely research.

Chapter 14
Some reflections on music
therapy research: an example
of collaborative enquiry
Leslie Bunt
INTRODUCTION
Medicine comprises science with handicraft, art, and often, with spiri-
tuality. We are talking here about the healing arts . . . Without intuition,
fantasy, emotions, reverence, and aesthetics, a scientist would be blind;
without logic, discipline, and ratio, an artist would be only a dreamer.
As physicians and therapists, we need a synthesis of these. Music is the
most intense means of emotional communication and it facilitates such
a synthesis in many ways.
(Spingte 1998a)
Music therapy is witnessing a steady rise in its acceptance as a paramedical
discipline, blending both artistic and scientiﬁc processes into a ‘healing art’.
This rise was charted in Chapter 1 and examples of various clinical applica-
tions were included in Part II and elsewhere. Alongside this growth in the
range of clinical material have emerged different research traditions, each
contributing to the discipline’s further acceptance. Some current patterns in
research are outlined in this chapter and some historical, philosophical and
practical reasons for differences between the emergent traditions discussed.
The chapter’s main contention is that there is room in music therapy for a
wide variety of research approaches. Flexibility, tolerance and common
sense are essential if we are not to ﬁnd ourselves becoming too far removed
from the very people music therapy is aiming to help. The themes of syn-
thesis, balance and integration, introduced above by the medical practitioner
and music medicine specialist Ralph Spingte, inﬂuence how this chapter
unfolds. The second half of the chapter illustrates some of these themes 
by charting the stages in some collaborative research at the Bristol Cancer
Help Centre.

Some reflections on music therapy research
271
SOME CURRENT PATTERNS IN MUSIC THERAPY
RESEARCH
Note Key research terms, deﬁned brieﬂy here and in more detail in other
texts, appear in bold (for their further elaboration see, for example,
Aldridge 1996; Ansdell and Pavlicevic 2001; Gilroy and Lee 1995; Langen-
berg et al. 1996; Ruud 1998; Smeijsters 1997; Wheeler 1995; Wigram et al.
1995).
There are external pressures from employing agencies for therapists to 
justify and evaluate their work. The ‘business speak’ of audit, cost-effectiveness,
quality assurance, appraisal and monitoring has created a purchaser/provider
and marketplace atmosphere in the delivery and evaluation of therapeutic
services. Penny Rogers has discussed the concept of evidence-based practice
(EBP) in relation to music therapy. She cites one deﬁnition of EBP, namely:
‘The conscientious, explicit and judicious use of current best evidence in mak-
ing decisions about the care of individual patients’ (Sackett et al. 1996; see
Rogers 2000: 11). Rogers cautions against the overemphasis on the ‘gold 
standard’ of randomised control trials (RCTs) in indicating evidence of good
practice, such approaches not linking easily with more individually based 
therapeutic practices. Nevertheless, carefully organised studies demonstrat-
ing the efﬁcacy of the work are still required; we owe this to our patients,
employers, as well as to ourselves. Questions that arise from clinical prac-
tice can be tested through research – these thorough journeys of searching
or searching again. Studies can be set up that research links between stated
objectives for a piece of work and the resulting effects of the intervention.
Results can then inform further practice.
Studies that explore causal links between intervention and resulting
effects are often described under the generic term of outcome. Here the empha-
sis is on recording the effects/outcomes of the work, usually in a language
accessible to all, over and above any detailed descriptions of the speciﬁc 
therapeutic process by which any outcomes are reached. Here are some 
examples of outcome-based questions:
(a) When working with children with communication problems are there any
measurable changes in the number of vocal sounds over a period of time
in music therapy when compared to a similar period without therapy?
(b) In what measurable ways can music therapy contribute to the indi-
vidual therapeutic aims devised by the multidisciplinary team for adults
with profound learning difﬁculties?
(c) When working with a group of elderly patients what is the amount 
of engaged contact time in music therapy when compared to another
group activity such as reminiscence therapy (see Odell-Miller, 1995;
Chapter 9)?

272
Part IV Professional life
Outcome studies stress an objective stance generally employing a research
method (ways of gathering and analysing the data) that records externally
observable and measurable behaviour. A series of hypotheses and research
questions are set up before the project begins. In example (a) above what is
called the null hypothesis would be that there are no changes in the number
of vocal sounds when two similar periods are compared. The project can then
be constructed to prove or disprove this hypothesis. The researcher, who often
sets out with a particular hunch, places the developing questions within the
context of previous published research in the area or speciﬁc theoretical back-
ground. These initial surveys are then included in the literature review. From
where do the questions emerge and why are they needed? Criteria for the
research project are selected; in the above example the children could all be
under 5 years old and non-verbal. A group of individuals are then carefully
selected that ﬁt these research criteria and this group is commonly referred
to as the sample, the question of sample size always being a source of much
debate as it inﬂuences the kind of statistical analysis that is possible. An ele-
ment of control is important, both in setting up of control or comparison groups
(the same number of people either not having the particular intervention or
a comparable one, as in example (d) above) and controlling and matching
for variables such as age, sex and any speciﬁc diagnosis. A very robust con-
trol is to allocate individuals to the treatment and control or comparison
group in a random fashion, as in a traditional RCT.
Variables are also labelled as being dependent or independent; in example
(a) the dependent variable would be the vocal sounds with the music ther-
apy intervention the independent variable. Can any causal links between these
two variables be established? Measures and procedures that can be quantiﬁed
numerically are generally employed in these kinds of studies. Numbers are
used to quantify the existence, strength or frequency of the observed phe-
nomena. If the raw data resulting from the measures and procedures meet
certain prescribed conditions then statistical tests can be applied. Space pre-
cludes discussion of the various criteria for descriptive or inferential statis-
tics, parametric or non-parametric tests and the reader is referred to such
standard texts as Siegel (1956) and Snedecor and Cochrane (1980) and to
the advice of a statistician. As pointed out by Ansdell and Pavlicevic in their
very approachable text Beginning Research in the Arts Therapies: A Practical
Guide (2001) it is important to be mindful of what kind of statistical ana-
lysis is to be used before starting a study. What level of probability is to be
set so that any results can be given a level of signiﬁcance beyond mere chance
occurrence? It is usual to set at least a 0.05 level, that is a guarantee of 
up to a 95 per cent that results are not due to chance. If the measures and
procedures are sufﬁciently valid and meet the criteria for speciﬁc statistical
tests then generalisation of effects is possible – what applies to this sample
population could generalise to a larger group. Measures also need to be
sufﬁciently robust to enable other researchers to replicate the study by test-
ing the same hypotheses with the similar method using a different sample.

Some reflections on music therapy research
273
There is a further range of internal pressures from within the profession
itself. During the last decade many questions have focused on discovering
more of the meaning of the music therapy process. Such knowledge can enrich
the development of our practice; the knowledge gained can be passed on to
our students and colleagues. Here the emphasis is on an internal enquiry,
an exploration of the processes that are regarded by many to be at the heart
of music therapy. Quality is often diametrically opposed to quantity, an indi-
vidual’s evolving response to the music therapy process given more empha-
sis than the more quantiﬁable outcomes to the work. The subjective worlds
of both patients and therapist are regarded as having validity in their own
right, their voices often being very much part of the research. There is 
not a striving for external objectivity as in the harder more quantiﬁable 
outcome-based studies. There is not a search for any one objective truth; on
the contrary there is a celebration of multiple perspectives. In approaches
within this softer process-based tradition the research questions emerge as
the work progresses; the questions are grounded in the practice. Process-based
research still demands attention to notions of validity and scientiﬁc rigour.
A literature review is still necessary. The data from this kind of research can
be presented as musical or verbal transcriptions and narratives, or using other
‘maps’ (images, metaphor, journals and so on) illustrating the detailed pro-
cesses, themes and constructs embedded in the work.
There is certainly a heightened emphasis on the music and its interpreta-
tion in this line of exploration, with researchers often including documen-
tation of the musical material as central evidence. There is much discussion
of the role of the researcher as therapist and/or observer. Other members of
the clinical team or observers are often included in the research, their voices
being included alongside the clients and therapist (Reason and Rowan 1981).
This is the basis of evaluation from different viewpoints, often referred to
as triangulation. Here are some process-based questions:
(a) What are the ‘critical moments’ in a period of therapy as identiﬁed by
signiﬁcant adults in a child’s life – parent, teacher – alongside the views
of the therapist?
(b) How are the ‘critical moments’ in a period of therapy deﬁned by a
depressed adult patient, the therapist and external observer?
(c) When is it appropriate to use group improvisation techniques and when
pre-composed music when working with elderly patients with dementia?
In addition to outcome and process-based studies there are also smaller research
traditions of a more philosophical or historical nature (see reviews by Aigen
1995; Solomon, 1995).
In their interviews Helen Odell-Miller and Tony Wigram referred to 
some of these emerging patterns. Helen completed her M.Phil. at The City
University based on an evaluative study of music therapy with older people
with dementia (see Chapter 9). She is currently planning research with 

274
Part IV Professional life
people under 65 years old and is concerned that research be linked to 
clinical practice.
I think that more than ever music therapists are going to have to relate what they
are doing to the clinical context of the people that they are working with. I think
if they can’t demonstrate outcome and that in some way this work is contributing
to the overall life of the person relating what they are doing back to the original
difﬁculty, diagnosis or problem then it won’t develop. . . . I am very interested in pro-
cess, for myself, and for my clients I know that’s also very important.
Tony completed his doctorate based on his work in vibro-acoustic therapy
(see Skille and Wigram 1995) and his current position in Denmark as head
of an international Ph.D. programme equips him well to observe some cur-
rent patterns. He shares Helen’s concern to relate research to practice.
I still feel strongly about trying to quantify the effects of music therapy. To ﬁnd out
what the outcome of our interventions is and to argue based on the evidence of
good data that music therapy works.
SOME ROOTS OF THESE PATTERNS: 
FURTHER THOUGHTS ON QUANTITATIVE 
AND QUALITATIVE METHODOLOGIES
Approaching musical applications in medical settings with scientiﬁc
means that include both qualitative and quantitative measures does 
not diminish the scientiﬁc reputation of either Music Therapy or Music
Medicine. The artiﬁcial dichotomy between qualitative and quantitative
research is identiﬁed as such in medical science nowadays.
(Spingte 1998b: 9)
Clearly certain kinds of questions demand certain kinds of research strat-
egies. If we are interested, for example, in ﬁnding out how music therapy
can be effective in helping to organise the control of movements for an 
adult with Parkinson’s Disease then some form of external, quantiﬁable and
outcome-based measures may be appropriate. The goals of the research 
relate to charting externally measurable and objective changes. Obviously 
such a one-faceted approach is only able to answer one narrow band of ques-
tions. Alternatively if we were interested in exploring how music therapy 
contributes to the same person’s inner feelings of self-worth we would then

Some reflections on music therapy research
275
be looking at a completely different set of questions and approach. We would
most likely be setting up questions and methods based in the narrative ﬂow
and interactions between both parties in the relationship. The speciﬁc pro-
cesses of that particular therapy for that particular person would become
more the focus. Obviously the personal motivation, philosophical and value
system of the therapist will inﬂuence the choice of research method (Gfeller
1995). Each researcher will bring to each project their own frame of refer-
ence or paradigm through which to view the work and, according to Lincoln
and Guba (1985: 15), ‘Paradigms represent a distillation of what we think
about the world, (but cannot prove)’.
As discussed in Chapter 2 in any music therapy encounter we can never
overlook the therapist’s clinical orientation and the connections between 
values, norms and interests in relation to how we perceive and act in the
world (also see Ruud 1998). Further to this discussion Jane Edwards has
surveyed ontological (nature of being) and epistemological (nature of know-
ledge) issues in relation to the various paradigms and traditions at the root
of music therapy research (Edwards 1999). She indicates that speciﬁc meth-
odological issues emerge from questions relating to paradigms, including in
her review succinct background to positivism, post-positivism, constructivism
and critical theory. At a rather more pragmatic level we should also not over-
look the question of who is paying for the research, the particular clinical
setting and general working conditions. In all the intricate debates over which
method is more appropriate, and much has been written and discussed in
recent years, we must continually bear in mind our prime responsibilities to
our clients and patients. As Bruscia states:
It bears repeating that the primary mission of music therapy, as both
discipline and profession, is to help clients to achieve health through music.
To limit music therapy research in any way is to limit this mission in a
corresponding way. If the client’s health is conceived only in physical
or behavioural terms, then quantitative research might be sufﬁcient; con-
versely, if the client’s health is conceived only in internal, covert, or experi-
ential terms, then qualitative research might be sufﬁcient. The problem
is that to deﬁne health in such either-or terms, and to limit the goals of
music therapy practice to either overt or covert goals, physical or social
realities, or objective or subjective phenomena is essentially a violation
of the rights of our clients to comprehensive treatment, and thus to 
complete health.
(Bruscia 1995b: 73)
It is clear that there are many different and valid methods of research in 
music therapy. The early research work, particularly in the USA and more
recently at the beginning of the research tradition in the UK, employed estab-
lished methods from the worlds of psychology, the behavioural sciences,

276
Part IV Professional life
medicine and other clinical practices to account for the efﬁcacy of the work.
The emphasis was on behavioural, physiological and outcome measures that
could be quantiﬁed. Interestingly, while some of the early research was 
laboratory-based there was a move to develop studies of a more natural-
istic stance with research soon moving out of the laboratory into the therapy
room. It is of no doubt that this early research (well documented in such
journals as the Journal of Music Therapy) made enormous contributions to
the growth of the profession. Posts were created on the evidence of the ‘proven’
effects of intervention. However, studies were becoming full of complex test
data and statistical analysis and many music therapists found it difﬁcult to
access the material. Therapists with an extensive musical background often
felt more comfortable with research material rooted in artistic, social, aes-
thetic, cultural, musical or therapeutic perspectives. There was a call for more
consideration of the art rather than the science of music therapy. Gradually
there was a move to create studies with more musical/therapeutic processes
at the centre. This more qualitatively based approach has gained much ground
recently and is seen by many inﬂuential researchers as the approach more
suited to the inherent nature and meaning of music therapy. Today the 
pendulum has certainly swung over in favour of qualitative research.
There are major philosophical issues at stake here and before moving 
on some of the key issues in both quantitative and qualitative approaches
are summarised in Table 14.1. These issues are explored extensively in the
references cited above.
Table 14.1 Some implicit assumptions within quantitative and qualitative approaches
QUANTITATIVE
• Positivistic
• Hypotheses derived from previous theory 
and practice
• Replicable questions
• Representative sample
• Reductionist
• Mechanistic
• Causal (independent and dependent 
variables)
• Measurement
• Prediction
• Search for objective truth
• Search for external evidence
• External observations
• Outcome
• External controls
• Valid and reliable measures
• Can generalise results
QUALITATIVE
• Non-positivistic
• No a priori hypotheses – emerge
from process
• Context-based questions
• Unique individuals
• Non-reductionist
• Narrative/discursive
• Non-causal (continuing process of
interrelationships in the research)
• Interpretation
• Non-predictability
• Value for subjective perspectives
• Voices of client/patient, therapist
• Internal observations
• Process
• Internal controls
• Internal validity and reliability
• Cannot generalise results

Some reflections on music therapy research
277
HOW CAN DIFFERENT APPROACHES EXIST SIDE
BY SIDE?
While clearly not wanting to limit research in any way Bruscia is one of many
researchers who views the quantitative and qualitative approaches as arriv-
ing from completely different world-views and not part of any connected con-
tinuum. What does seem appropriate, however, is for these two approaches
to be used selectively to address different questions, as in the example of our
Parkinsonian patient above. Besides the possibility of linking a particular
project to the appropriate approach Bruscia also proposes two further
options. One is to look at different aspects of the same phenomenon in 
different and independent studies. This relates to the notion of viewing 
clinical work through different ‘lenses’ be it psychodynamic, developmental
or physiological as discussed by Pavlicevic (1997). The second option is 
to combine different procedures and kinds of data in the same study but to
stay ﬁrm to one of the two philosophical positions (Bruscia 1995b).
Ken Wilber has been a source of inspiration in other chapters and this
passing reference to using various ‘lenses’ through which to view the work
links to his explorations of the different ways we access knowledge. In Eye
to Eye Wilber recalls St Bonaventure’s teachings concerning three basic ways
of knowing, namely: ‘the eye of ﬂesh, by which we perceive the external world
of space, time and objects; the eye of reason, by which we attain a know-
ledge of philosophy, logic and the mind itself; and the eye of contemplation,
by which we rise to a knowledge of transcendent realities’ (Wilber 1983: 3).
Traditionally the world of empirical science belongs, for the most part, to
the ‘eye of ﬂesh’, psychology and all internal philosophical exploration to
the ‘eye of reason’ and meditative and religious experience to the ‘eye of con-
templation’. According to Wilber the dominant world-view of contemporary
science tends to link the ‘eye of reason’ to the ‘eye of ﬂesh’ taking account
of evidence from rather narrow bands of empirical investigation. There is
no place in this world-view for the ‘eye of contemplation’. If we look at music
therapy research through these three ‘eyes’ we can see how, for example, that
a quantitative exploration of basic physiological changes while listening to
or playing music could link to the ‘eye of ﬂesh’ (a search for evidence at a
sensory level).
We could research the more rational and mental aspects of the work linked
to the ‘the eye of reason’ – how the music helps to organise thinking or to
release a range of feelings, for example. We are then moving from an exter-
nal search for evidence of what can be observed happening to a more inter-
nal and qualitative search for evidence of meaning. The more ineffable
aspects of our work move us even further (deeper or higher depending on
our choice of metaphor) into more internal (those perennial and existentially
based questions) and spiritual worlds (‘the eye of contemplation’). Now can
these three ‘eyes’ of knowing ever become more integrated, the worlds of

278
Part IV Professional life
empirical investigation existing on more equal terms with the worlds of 
mental investigation and transcendental exploration? In a later text The
Marriage of Sense and Soul Wilber proposes that a major challenge for today
is to ﬁnd some way of integrating the ‘eye of contemplation’ with the other
perspectives, while still upholding their differentiation (Wilber 1998 and also
see Wilber 2000).
The three ‘eyes’ can be deﬁned further. Wilber describes the external ‘eye
of ﬂesh’ as ‘monological’ – in our context of music therapy we can investig-
ate physiological responses to sound without ever having to interact with the
person. We can view the person from outside with one-way monologues. The
internal ‘eye of reason’ involves engaging with and trying to understand 
the person and is described as ‘dialogical’. Wilber describes the ‘eye of con-
templation’ as ‘translogical,’ transcending the logical, rational and mental.
We can see how these further descriptions apply to some current themes in
music therapy research. There is a concern to move away from a monolog-
ical view of the work and to engage with the people involved in the research
in some form of active dialogue. ‘We are not subjects staring at objects; we
are subjects trying to understand subjects – we are in the intersubjective 
circle, the dialogical dance. Monological is to describe; dialogical is to
understand’ (Wilber 1998: 118).
Wilber takes us even further; the worlds of art, science and morals all being
described in different kinds of language. Art and all personal, aesthetic and
expressive experiences are highly subjective and described in ‘I’ language. The
monological world of science is objective and described in ‘IT’ language. The
world of shared morals is very much the collective ‘WE.’ The trap of today’s
world-view is that the world of ‘IT’ seems not only conﬁned to empirical 
science but has also attempted to move into the worlds of ‘I’ and ‘WE,’ a
world-view referred to by Wilber as ‘ﬂatland.’ It is invasive and all encom-
passing – all ‘Is’ and ‘WEs’ reduced to ‘ITs’. There is not much space in this
‘ﬂatland’ for artistic expression or the worlds of soul and spirit. Here are
further reasons for some of the current concerns in music therapy research.
The overemphasis on quantitative (monological) research for so many years
goes some way in explaining the more recent swing to more qualitative 
(dialogical/translogical) research. We can externally measure changes, for 
example, in brain patterns (‘IT’) while listening to music but they tell us 
little about the mind/psyche (‘I’) or the individual’s unique response to the
music. But the question remains – does a qualitative approach by itself take
us any closer to understanding the whole picture?
In tracking the development of some of Wilber’s ideas in relation to music
therapy research it now seems possible to propose an integration of the dif-
ferent worlds, while tolerating and respecting their differences. A broad
approach to empirical exploration can include evidence from the external ‘ITs’
and the internal worlds of ‘I’ and ‘WE’. Each area can stand on its own with

Some reflections on music therapy research
279
its own internal validity, form, content and relevance. Each research tradi-
tion can contribute its perspective to a larger whole. The notion of a con-
tinuum is being advocated here, keeping as open an attitude as possible to
working within multiple perspectives. Wigram also welcomes a balance
between quantitative and qualitative research and looks forward to more 
joint research.
Collaborative research would be very beneﬁcial. Joint research with psychotherapists,
with psychologists, teachers. The balance has perhaps swung too strongly towards
qualitative research. This has been very valuable but I would still like to see quan-
titative studies done, to actually make deeper investigation, to make us sure that
what we are doing and how we do it are effective. The future will depend a lot on
all of those factors. We can’t rest on our laurels. You can have a very good team
valuing your work but just down the road may be an institution who have never
heard of music therapy and you have to start again.
EXAMPLE: A COLLABORATIVE STUDY OF THE
MUSIC THERAPY PROGRAMME AT THE BRISTOL
CANCER HELP CENTRE (BCHC)
Introduction
The arrival in Bristol of a visiting music therapist/researcher (Sarah Burns)
created the opportunity to further some collaborative research into the
music therapy programme at the BCHC. The two music therapists (SB and
LB) agreed to work within a broad perspective, enabling any collaboration
to develop as a bridge between some of the patterns in research outlined above.
The key collaborators in any research were to be the cancer patients and we
wanted their voices and needs to remain the central theme. So as to broaden
the potential of the collaboration two other researchers from different 
disciplines were invited to join the team: a neuroendocrinologist (Mike
Harbuz) and a psychophysiologist (Frank Hucklebridge). In collaborating
together we were interested in how the music therapy programme could be
studied from different viewpoints with each researcher remaining true to their
research orientation and particular world-view. This part of the chapter will
focus on procedural issues and features of the collaboration; supporting ref-
erences and interpretations of results are published elsewhere (Bunt et al. 2000;
Burns et al. 2001). Firstly, it was important for the members of the group
to be familiar with the philosophy of the BCHC and the place of music 
therapy within the overall service.

280
Part IV Professional life
The context and some background
The BCHC offers a holistic programme addressing all aspects of patients’
needs with an emphasis on the integration of mind, body and spirit. The 
centre receives some referrals from health-care practitioners but mostly self-
referrals. Since the mid-1980s music therapy has been a well-established part
of the weekly group residential programme that includes meditation, guid-
ance on nutrition, spiritual healing, therapeutic massage and counselling. The
researchers were aware of evidence that these kinds of interventions contributed
to overcoming the sense of powerlessness that people often experience when
faced with a diagnosis of cancer. The music therapist researcher (SB) also
documented the existing literature on the effective use of music therapy in
cancer care.
The current music programme combines a one-hour listening experience
(live or recorded music) on the Monday or Tuesday evening with a one-
and-a-half-hour music therapy group on the Wednesday afternoon. This is
a one-off therapy group with very clear boundaries. In general each group
(averaging between 8 and 10 residents and a small number of supporters)
starts with an emphasis on establishing feelings of trust and security. This
is achieved by encouraging music-making that gives a sense of freedom within
clear structures, for example instrumental free exploration, pulsed-based or
call and response activities. As the members of the group feel more at ease
with the various ‘players’ in the setting the therapist is less directive. Free
improvisation usually forms the central part of the session with themes emerg-
ing from the spontaneous music that are further articulated through more
playing or sometimes through some selected listening (with or without guid-
ance). There is ﬂexible blending of words and music as the members of each
group begin to work on issues that have arisen during the week to date or
have been sparked off by the music. The therapist (LB) makes sure to bring
the work to a clear closure. The work is very music-centred, framed within
a humanistic/transpersonal perspective. As a trained practitioner in Guided
Imagery and Music LB brings aspects of this approach to the work. A fur-
ther containing feature is the pre- and post-brieﬁng with the resident coun-
sellor, nurse and any other relevant staff.
An earlier ‘pilot’ study
The music programme generally created much spontaneous feedback from
the residents and supporters. The staff at the Centre had reported anec-
dotal comments indicating that the music therapy session was viewed
mostly as a positive experience. This was veriﬁed by an earlier ‘pilot’ study
when spontaneous answers to the statement ‘Music and Us’ made before 
and after the music therapy group were collated and codiﬁed by a psy-
chologist/counsellor. Key elements to emerge from this earlier study and 

Some reflections on music therapy research
281
ﬁrst collaboration were: constructs that shifted from the individual to the
collective; passive to active feelings; shifts in energy; temporary relief from
preoccupation with pain and gaining new insights (for detailed results see
Bunt and Marston-Wyld 1995; Bunt 1994: 151–157).
This earlier collaboration was safe and friendly. The researcher’s human-
istic approach to counselling was comparable to the music therapist’s
approach. Her therapy skills enabled her to feel comfortable conducting semi-
structured interviews and informal discussions with the patients. We were
aware that her previous knowledge and support for music therapy could have
led to bias in her selection of the various ‘constructs’. As in similar descrip-
tive work there were also issues of ‘translation’ with several aspects of the
musical experiences being difﬁcult to record in words. Gary Ansdell aptly
describes this as the ‘Music Therapist’s Dilemma’ – ‘the core problem in music
therapy of having to use words and verbal logic . . . to represent complex
musical processes in music therapy (and the therapeutic processes which are
seen to occur within these)’ (Ansdell 2001: 23).
Identifying the strengths and interests of the
members of the research group
The members of the new research group were able to observe from the 
earlier study how the constructs subdivided into external and internal areas,
individual and collective experiences and comments that could be linked 
to Wilber’s three eyes of knowledge. Would it be possible in a new project
to look at the different phenomena with the ‘eye of ﬂesh’ (a physiologically
based study), the ‘eye of reason’ (a psychological and more internal study)
and the ‘eye of contemplation’ (a more process-based study, respecting the
more meditative aspects of the work at the centre)? Could a new project 
be set up with different sections that maintained their own differentiation
but also contributed to a holistic and larger integration? Could different 
parts of the project use separate yet sufﬁciently rigorous research methods?
Would a larger picture be built up by using a range of both external and
internal measures? Could then the results from the different smaller studies
be integrated to inform the direction of future work?
The members of the research group wanted to use different ways 
of exploring some of the effects and the processes at work during both the
listening and the playing experiences. Each researcher brought to the pro-
ject their personal philosophical orientation, values, interests and preferred
mode of research. For this collaboration to be effective and for mutual trust
and understanding to evolve, it was important that these orientations were
transparent and open from the outset of the project. Discussions at this stage
were concerned with respecting and tolerating the different approaches. We
were aware of the current divisions (outlined above) between research into
the effects of intervention (quantitative) and the processes (qualitative)

282
Part IV Professional life
whereby the effects were reached. We felt that there were gradations
between these two positions and agreed with Smeijsters’ stance that ‘It is also
true that “effects” are part of the process’ (Smeijsters 1997: 44). The group
of researchers wanted also to:
•
respect the wishes and needs of the patients at all times;
•
keep the project as naturalistic as possible with as little interference to
the customary pattern of the sessions;
•
respond to the rigours of EBP;
•
respect the complementary and transpersonal ethos of the centre;
•
explore what was happening from multiple perspectives;
•
maximise the strengths of the different members of the research group.
Opening questions
After a series of meetings a range of questions emerged that could be
approached using both quantitative and qualitative procedures. The meet-
ings were not always easy and straightforward with the various conﬂicts
between different research traditions and world-views being welcomed as a
means of making the various assumptions explicit (Torbert 1981). Four main
questions and a supplementary question emerged:
1
Are there any individual psychological changes during the experience of
listening to music in a relaxed state?
2
Are there any individual psychological changes during the active music
therapy?
3
Are there any individual physiological changes during the listening
experience?
4
Are there any individual physiological changes during the active play-
ing session?
Supplementary question: Are there any reported differences between 
listening to the same music played either live or recorded?
We wanted to give equal validity to both psychological and physiological
measures. There was a particular interest in any potential correlation between
the results from the psychological and physiological measures, staff at the
BCHC being very interested in the recent work on psychoneuroimmunology.
Formulating the methodology, further
consultation and background
Firstly, the two music therapists wanted to use focus groups as a qualitative
method of research. Using this method data emerge from group discussions
and interviews that ‘focus’ on a certain topic. The music therapists were keen
for the focus groups to be a time for patients to compare and contrast their

Some reflections on music therapy research
283
experience in both the listening and playing sessions. Secondly, after con-
sultation with an experimental psychologist, the research team decided to use
a mood adjective checklist (the UWIST test, devised by the University of
Wales Institute of Science and Technology). This standardised pre- and post-
test can be used to measure changes in levels of tension, energy and hedo-
nic tone (feelings of well-being), some of the areas noted in the earlier ‘pilot’
study. Thirdly, the two scientists in the group proposed initially to meas-
ure variable heart rate responses as potential indicators of any physiolog-
ical change. After lengthy debate it was decided that saliva testing would be
a less intrusive method. Collection would be made by the patients placing a
salivette under their tongue for a period of three minutes prior to and after
each session. This test was identiﬁed to measure for salivary immunoglobu-
lin A (sIgA) and cortisol, research evidence positioning sIgA as a marker 
of immunity and changes in salivary cortisol as an accepted and validated
measure of stress. The music therapists were aware that combined music 
and imagery interventions with college students had produced signiﬁcant
increases in sIgA and that within music therapy there had been some work
indicating changes using sIgA as a marker. The group knew of no studies
that investigated the relationship of these physiological parameters in 
cancer patients.
Hypotheses and hunches
We created some hypotheses for the physiological and psychological-based
questions. We hypothesised that:
(a) during the listening session people would become increasingly more
relaxed, less tense and have an increased sense of well-being;
(b) during the music therapy session group people would become more 
energised, have an increased sense of well-being and feel less tense;
(c) during both listening and playing experiences the levels of sIgA would
increase and levels of cortisol decrease;
(d) the presence of live musicians would contribute further to the hypothe-
sised changes in (a).
For the more qualitative aspects of the study we wanted the questions to
evolve more from the processes, from the reporting, observations and focus
groups.
Further practicalities and setting up the
procedures
The research protocol was written by the music therapist researcher and 
submitted for funding. The research committee at the BCHC approved the
protocol. The project began in earnest with initial funding in place.

284
Part IV Professional life
It was decided to adopt three different kinds of procedures:
1
the UWIST test (pre- and post-session);
2
focus groups;
3
saliva tests (pre- and post-sessions).
If we look at these procedures within the frames of reference proposed by
Wilber, it is clear that the saliva tests sit within the external, quantitative,
objective, monological (‘eye of ﬂesh’) frame (IT). The mood checklist,
although using a numerical rating scale and available for statistical analysis,
needs to engage more internal exploration, a more ‘I’-based and ‘dialogical’
injunction. The discussions in the focus groups provided data that ﬂowed
very clearly from a deﬁnitely ‘I’-based perspective (‘eye of reason’ with some
features of the ‘eye of contemplation’).
Participation in the project
We approached each member of each residential group within the time period
of the project to inform them of the project and request their participation.
All agreed to take part and signed consent forms, a total of 29 cancer patients
(21 female and 8 male) with the average age of 49. We would be focusing on
the cancer patients although the groups would function in the usual way includ-
ing both patients and their supporters. There were two stages to the project.
Stage 1 comprised:
•
20 people (15 women and 5 men) in three consecutive weekly groups;
•
Tuesday evening one-hour session of listening (recorded) facilitated by the
music therapist (LB) – a short relaxation induction followed by the music;
•
Wednesday afternoon one-and-a-half-hour music therapy group facilit-
ated by LB;
•
pre- and post-UWIST tests for both listening and music therapy sessions
administered by the music therapist researcher (SB);
•
Friday morning one-hour focus group meeting facilitated by SB with the
resident group counsellor in the role of observer and recorder.
Note The music for listening was composed by Celia Harper for ‘Sulís’ 
(a group of distinguished concert artists) for use in such contexts as the BCHC.
The music is meditative, mostly using ancient Latin texts, and is scored for
various combinations of soprano, male alto, violin and baroque harp.
Stage 2 comprised:
•
one group of 9 people (6 women and 3 men);
•
presence of live musicians from ‘Sulís’ for listening to the same music
as in Stage 1 and performed in the same order;

Some reflections on music therapy research
285
•
music therapy group as in Stage 1;
•
pre- and post-UWIST tests as in Stage 1;
•
saliva testing for sIgA and cortisol in both listening and music therapy
sessions.
Note Two further weeks were scheduled for Stage 2 that would have
increased the number of patients to bring numbers closer to those of Stage
1. Unexpected circumstances, beyond the researchers’ control, resulted in these
plans being curtailed.
Collation and analysis of the data
Only data from the patients were used in the analysis. The music therapist
researcher (SB) collected and collated the psychological tests. The raw data
were sent to a statistician for analysis using descriptive statistics and a series
of paired t tests. SB transcribed all the recorded data from the focus groups.
The salivettes were frozen after collection and sent to the psychophysiolo-
gist for analysis. SB acted as the overall coordinator of the data.
Summary of results
The statistically signiﬁcant results were:
(a) from the UWIST test:
•
less tension at the end of the listening group;
•
less energy at the end of the listening group;
•
increased sense of ‘well-being’ (hedonic tone) after the music therapy group;
•
increased level of energy after the music therapy group;
•
less tension after the music therapy group in three of the four weeks.
(b) from the saliva test (based on samples from eight patients):
•
increased concentration of sIgA in the saliva after listening;
•
increased secretion rate of sIgA in the saliva after listening;
•
reduction in salivary concentration of cortisol between the Tuesday and
the Wednesday sessions.
The other non-signiﬁcant results were:
•
increased sense of well-being after the listening;
•
more pronounced psychological changes in the presence of the musicians
(Stage 2) than when compared to listening to the same music on their
CD (Stage 1).

286
Part IV Professional life
Some of the earlier hunches and observations regarding feelings of well-
being, changes in energy and tension level were conﬁrmed. It was clear, for
example, that there was a signiﬁcant decrease in the level of tension after 
listening and a signiﬁcant rise in energy after the music therapy group. 
Patients felt better about themselves after playing. The more internally
observed mood changes with the decrease in tension level after listening were
matched by the physiological changes. However, there was no signiﬁcant 
correlation between the two groups of physiological and psychological
results.
These results were further supported by the qualitative data from the focus
groups originally analysed by recording recurring themes and allotting them
to each of the three tones (hedonic, tense arousal, energetic arousal) of 
the UWIST test. The presence of the live musicians appeared to increase the
effects.
Note For more detailed discussion of the results, see Burns et al. (2001).
Further analysis of the themes from 
the focus groups
Some comments focused on describing a sensory response (‘eye of ﬂesh’),
some a more internal and mental reaction (‘eye of reason’) and others a more
spiritual perspective (‘eye of contemplation’). A group of music therapy 
students helped to code the comments using a frame derived from Wilber’s
differentiation. The main features to emerge from this ﬁrst analysis by the
students were:
•
the large proliferation of Mind-based (‘eye of reason’) comments;
•
the very few speciﬁc Spirit-based (‘eye of contemplation’) comments;
•
the large number of comments that overlapped across the three codes
(Mind, Body, Spirit).
It was decided to add further overlaps to the codes: B/M; M/S; B/S; and the
fully integrative M/B/S. SB and LB coded each of the 174 comments from
the four weeks of focus groups. This second attempt at coding conﬁrmed:
•
the supremacy of M comments;
•
the high ranking of B/M and M/B/S comments;
•
taken together the more integrated comments (B/M; M/B/S; M/S; and
B/S) making up the second largest grouping of comments;
•
the larger number of B comments relating to the listening;
•
the very few S, M/S and B/S comments.
To provide a ﬂavour of the comments here is one from each code:

Some reflections on music therapy research
287
M
freedom of choice; freedom to express (playing)
B/M
the change of mood within the music had a ‘knock-on’ effect both emo-
tionally and physically (listening)
M/B/S
feeling immersed in the sound of the Tibetan bowl, went off somewhere
– very calming (listening)
B
felt the immune system had a boost (general comment)
M/S
inspired (!) to take up the playing of an instrument (playing)
B/S
felt more relaxed and uplifted towards the end of the session
(listening)
S
felt more whole and harmonious (listening)
Flaws and pointers for future study
There were obvious methodological ﬂaws in the project. Patients were self-
selecting, being drawn to the BCHC and its philosophy and ethos, creat-
ing a bias. Rigorous controls and comparisons were lacking and the patients
exhibited both different types and stages of cancer. Patients were also at 
different stages in their treatment process.
This collaboration is being developed further into a larger study to:
•
focus on one physiological measure;
•
explore subjective experiences and inﬂuence on mood using not only 
standardised tests but semi-structured in-depth interviews and journal-
keeping;
•
focus on one cancer population and a limited age range;
•
select groups of patients that are not undergoing chemotherapy or
radiotherapy or any other intensive intervention;
•
include pre- and post-observation periods and a comparison group;
•
provide courses of ongoing music therapy;
•
allocate patients randomly to one of two therapy groups or the com-
parison group;
•
explore a wider range of musical styles and personal preferences for the
listening experience, both live and recorded.
The protocol for this new study is being written up with a view to seek-
ing funding and approval by the various ethics committees. Sarah Burns has
left the Bristol team to pursue her own doctoral work researching music ther-
apy with breast cancer patients in Australia. The group has been joined by
three additional members: the BCHC’s Director of Education (Pat Turton)
and two university colleagues (Norma Daykin and Stuart Mclean) special-
ising in health and social care issues from fundamentally qualitative perspectives
and whose input into this ongoing process is hereby acknowledged.

288
Part IV Professional life
A musical metaphor
The musical form of theme and variations was used metaphorically to
describe the stages in this collaborative process when this work at the
BCHC was presented at a music therapy research convivium (included in
Robarts, forthcoming). The third movement of Benjamin Britten’s second
string quartet (a string quartet in itself a superb example of subtle negotia-
tion and collaboration) employs one of his favourite forms, a Chacony. Britten
begins with a unison treatment of his theme and during the ensuing 29 vari-
ations this theme is subjected to various treatments. Different voices are intro-
duced to comment on the theme; the theme moves between foreground and
background textures. It is extended, rhythmically altered or heavily disguised.
The movement also includes three solo cadenza-like passages. If we extend
the metaphor to the work at the BCHC, the opening questions relating to
the needs of the cancer patients could be regarded as the central theme. The
‘players’ in the collaborative enquiry each had their own views and perspectives
on the theme. Sometimes a particular voice was very prominent and would
move a different point of view into the background, albeit temporarily. As in
the Chacony there was constant debate, ideas being exchanged and elaborated
and with at times conﬂicting views – all eventually moving to a resolution.
Throughout the process it was possible to return to the opening questions
(theme) if any discussion was moving too far away from the initial ideas.
Space was even provided for the occasional cadenza-like ﬂight of fancy.
CONCLUSION
The work at the BCHC provided rich sources of data that were analysed
using different approaches. Each individual approach was differentiated, 
considered as important as the others and yet able to contribute to a larger
perspective. Some research based within one context was interpreted with
this emphasis on multiple perspectives. This attitude was in line with the com-
plementary and holistic philosophy of the BCHC. We attempted to demon-
strate how internal and more subjective comments have as much validity as
the more objective and physiological measures. Changes in sIgA levels are
interesting to record but more meaning is added once participants are asked
to reﬂect about their internal states and level of tension arousal. Comments
of a more contemplative nature were also given much attention. Some of
the analysis focused on individual responses; other results were presented as
group scores. Varied ways of describing the work, drawn from the traditions
of different disciplines, were integrated into the ﬁnal report for the Centre
and subsequent publications. Art and science appeared to be well integrated
in this study.

Some reflections on music therapy research
289
The researchers approached the study from these different perspectives.
We adopted the broad approach to empirical investigation as advocated by
Wilber. We tried to explore each area with the same amount of rigour and
discipline; for example there was as much care taken with the setting-up of
the procedures for the focus groups as for the saliva test. All the areas were
concerned with systematic enquiry, data collection, analysis and interpretation.
Connections were made both within and across each area of investigation.
The participants did not appear confused by the different ways with which
we approached this study. There was unanimous agreement to be involved
in the project. At the start of the project the two music therapists were most
interested in how to manage the focus groups, being intuitively drawn to a
more qualitative approach within this particular context. We were worried
that even the few minutes demanded by the saliva test would be too intrus-
ive and damage trust and feelings of safety. Paradoxically there was a great
deal of interest shown by the participants in the saliva test. They seemed keener
to know the harder results from this quantitative analysis than a summary
of the focus group discussion and the results from the mood checklist. The
music therapists may have been worried but the participants convinced
them that these anxieties were unfounded. This was a change in viewpoint
that resulted from carrying out this study.
In concluding her paper ‘Our Own Kind of Evidence’ the art therapist
Andrea Gilroy writes:
But in establishing research in art therapy I hope we will use both qual-
itative and quantitative methodologies to ask questions which matter, 
which will be of direct beneﬁt to patient care and which make sense to
us and to our patients. This is where experience and common sense speak
loudest – that we conduct research that builds on clinical experience and
skills rather than neglecting or diminishing them. This is an immensely
exciting prospect and one which must not be curtailed by externally
imposed ‘rules of evidence.’ We have our own kind of evidence.
(Gilroy 1996: 59)
Only one change is needed to substitute the word ‘music’ for art.

Chapter 15
Transformation, Ovid and
Guided Imagery and Music
(GIM)
Leslie Bunt
INTRODUCTION
We cannot help but transform our experience – Freud’s emblem for this
is dream-work – and we cannot help but express ourselves.
(Phillips 1998: 11)
Guided Imagery and Music (GIM) was presented at the Ninth World
Congress of Music Therapy (held in Washington in 1999) as one of ﬁve spe-
cialist approaches in music therapy. The lengthy training in this approach
is one of the options available to a music therapist seeking new and exciting
challenges. This chapter presents some perspectives on the transformational
potential of this powerful approach.
To echo Adam Phillips, GIM therapists clearly witness clients trans-
forming their experience and expressing themselves. It is as if the world of
dreams can be glimpsed while the music lasts. In GIM a complex matrix of
transformations continually takes place through changes in levels of con-
sciousness, in the images and in the structural aspects of the music. Clients
appear to seek out deep transformational processes in coming to GIM and
these various changes often develop into a pattern unique to each person’s
journey through therapy. This chapter includes an example from one 
client’s journey, including themes from the GIM sessions and their outward
expression in interlinked sessions of active improvisation, the most common
approach described throughout this handbook. Reference is made to the
Roman poet Ovid and his collection of stories Metamorphoses in connect-
ing the nature of transformation in GIM with deep and collective processes
at the root of our humanity. It is rather inspiring that these very ancient 
and mythical stories continue to have such a deep resonance for us today.
It is as if they demand to be articulated in their various guises at different
times in history.
Nor does anything retain its own appearance permanently. Ever-
inventive nature continually produces one shape from another. Nothing

Transformation, Ovid and GIM
291
in the entire universe ever perishes, believe me, but things vary and adopt
a new form. The phrase ‘being born’ is used for beginning to be some-
thing different from what one was before, while ‘dying’ means ceasing
to be the same. Though this thing may pass into that, and that into this,
yet the sum of things remains unchanged.
(‘The teachings of Pythagoras’ from Ovid’s 
Metamorphoses: Book XV)
Ovid used the character of Pythagoras to articulate these aspects of changing
form, of transformation. We may resist these ideas in our human striving to
cling to some sense of permanency but we know deep down that nothing in
the universe is rigidly static or lasts for more than a fraction of a second in
a similar form. Everything is in a state of ﬂux. In discussing Plato’s distinc-
tion between being and becoming, Richard Tarnas writes:
All phenomena are in a never-ending process of transformation from one
thing into another, becoming this or that and then perishing, changing
in relation to one person and another, or to the same person at differ-
ent times. Nothing in this world is, because everything is always in a
state of becoming something else.
(Tarnas 1991: 9)
WHAT IS GIM?
GIM involves listening to speciﬁc programmes of recorded music in a
deeply relaxed state. The Association for Music and Imagery describes GIM
as ‘a music-centered, transformational therapy which uses speciﬁcally pro-
grammed classical music to stimulate and support a dynamic unfolding of
inner experiences in service of physical, psychological and spiritual whole-
ness’ (AMI 1990). The form of a classic GIM session is divided into ﬁve clear
sections, lasting between one and a half and two hours:
1
Prelude This is generally verbal in nature, as at the start of any psycho-
therapeutic encounter, but may also include the use of journal, mandala
drawing, improvised music-making or other artistic expression.
2
Induction The guide/therapist invites the ‘traveller’ to lie on a couch and
induces a deep state of rest using a variety of relaxation techniques, the
client moving from the upright position in the ‘here and now’ to an altered
state of consciousness (ASC). As the induction draws to a close there is
a transition to the next section when the therapist suggests a starting
image to the ‘traveller’ (the choice of image often emerging from themes
aired during the Prelude). This interaction of concentrated focus while
in a state of deep relaxation is one of the key elements of GIM.

292
Part IV Professional life
3
Listening and imaging This is the heart of the session when the traveller
is invited to share the experiences of listening to the music and to report
any images to the therapist/guide. The term ‘image’ is used generically
to refer to all body-based sensations, feelings, intuitions, memories,
associations, symbols, visual images or any other inner experiences. The
role of the therapist is to witness and help deepen the client’s elabora-
tion of these experiences using appropriate interventions including
reﬂective questioning and non-verbal support. The therapist is attentive
not to direct any images.
4
Return The traveller is assisted by the therapist to return to the ‘here
and now.’
5
Postlude The traveller processes the experiences with the support of 
the guide, making any connections with the Prelude and the stage in the
therapeutic process. The images develop a life of their own and a client
may gain insights some time after the session as the images continue to
resonate.
TRANSFORMATION IN GIM
It is signiﬁcant that the AMI describes GIM as a ‘transformational therapy’.
One of the therapeutic strengths of GIM is this rich interplay between the
‘unfolding of inner experiences’ that can lead to wholeness and the deep 
listening to music within an ASC. It is a therapy that moves and has its 
resonance through a complex web of transformations. There are at least three
aspects of the GIM session where transformations can be located. Firstly,
the images, symbols and feelings experienced in GIM sessions occur while
in an ASC. During the induction the therapist invites the client to move 
to a different space and time, from the therapy room to ‘various realms of
the imagination’ (Bruscia 1995a: 181). This moving of consciousness is in
essence transformational. There is a changing of the form of consciousness
from an everyday waking state to an ASC. Secondly, the images, symbols
and feelings themselves undergo continual changes in form, shape and
meaning within each session and from one session to the next. The images
transform as the person moves through the therapeutic process, shifting from
preconscious to pre-personal through the fully differentiated personal levels
of development to those of transpersonal consciousness (see Clark 1999; Lewis
1999; Wilber et al. 1986). Thirdly, there are complex transformations con-
stantly unfolding within and among the many layers of the music itself, with
simultaneous and sequential organic changes occurring in melody, har-
mony, rhythm, form, timbre and so forth. If we take modulation as an exam-
ple of a process of transformation we can observe how in Western classical
music, for example, there are signiﬁcant shifts and transitions between one
key and the next. Music is also able to be in more than one key at any one

Transformation, Ovid and GIM
293
time or even to have no sense of key at all. So many of the musical forms
and structures that have survived through the centuries have organic growth
and transformation at their core, for example: theme and variations, fugue,
sonata form and the whole ediﬁce of Western classical symphonic writing.
As implied by Ovid, music, like everything else in the universe, is continu-
ally producing one shape from another, is constantly in a state of becoming
something else.
These three transformational aspects of GIM – changes in consciousness,
images and the music itself – are seen to be all closely interrelated in a dance-
like matrix. Transformations in the levels of consciousness can link with
changes in the music. Close study of the various musical programmes used
in GIM from both practical and theoretical standpoints reveals both how
these shifts and transformations occur and also the great care needed in cre-
ating programmes to enable the client to make full use of the various levels
of the altered state. For example, the GIM programmes, particularly the more
advanced ones, place the most intense music or music with the most sus-
tained mood or length at central points within the programme. This allows
sufﬁcient time for the client both to reach a deep altered state and to emerge
from it during the music that precedes and follows. There is also a rich inter-
play between image and music. Musical transformation can be a metaphor
of psychological transformation; Bernstein going further to say that ‘All musi-
cal transformations lead to metaphorical results’ (Bernstein 1976: 153).
During a series of GIM sessions we can observe similarities between dif-
ferent musical structures and processes and certain structures and processes
in the imagery. While hearing the music the client is also creating an instan-
taneous link between image and music. It is as if the client is experiencing
the music at different levels, from the surface to the deep structural, reach-
ing into the music to ﬁnd the level that matches and resonates with the image.
Sometimes the music is very much to the foreground in this process, the 
musical structures inﬂuencing the way in which the images are evoked and
transformed. This does not happen in any simplistic one-to-one symbolic or
causal correspondence between one musical gesture and the creation of an
image but in an ongoing organic and interactive way, which is in itself another
process of transformation. At other times the images tend to ride on the music
with the music being present as a container in the background. Here the images
seem to take on a life of their own with threads of connections to the musi-
cal containment.
Music shifts and transforms. As implied above we also know that this 
shifting process is ‘true of our internal universe of images, thoughts and 
sensations’ (Engler 1986: 18). We are continuing to learn more about these
shifting patterns of transformation from the physical sciences and from
researchers creating bridges between Western psychology and ancient sys-
tems of Eastern religion (for example see Wilber 2000). In this way the whole
notion of transformation links the ancient philosophers from both East and

294
Part IV Professional life
West with contemporary explorers of consciousness and the very central 
mystery of music. We remain intrigued by this notion of continually chang-
ing form yet the sum of things remaining unchanged. We are moved and
inspired by this great paradox.
A FURTHER NOTE ON EMOTION AND MUSIC
Music has been viewed as being composed of the very gestures, dynamic forms
and changing shapes of our emotions (Pavlicevic’s elaboration of ‘dynamic
form’ was discussed in Chapters 1 and 4). Changes and transformations in
our lives can likewise resonate in the symbolic forms of music; in this way,
music acts as a ‘transformer of shared meaning’ (Bunt 1994: 73). We hear
and recognise ourselves in the music. Working in GIM brings us in constant
contact with these various meeting points between music and emotion.
Firstly, there are the associative connections: the ‘Darling, they’re playing
our tune’ notion (Davies 1978), which can also be observed in other forms
of receptive music therapy. In GIM a particular piece of music or fragment
of melody, rhythm or harmony can trigger a whole range of highly personal
associations with speciﬁc events and places, images, memories of certain 
people, particularly if the experiences or people have been signiﬁcant in the
person’s life. Secondly, listening to music can create links between particu-
lar musical characteristics and some external natural event or human feel-
ing. We can describe these connections as ‘iconic’, in GIM observing clients
making connections between aspects of the music and non-musical events
and feelings. A third area focuses on more intrinsic connections. Here con-
nections can be observed between the internal emotional experiences and both
surface and deep structural aspects of the music. In many ways GIM allows
for an interaction between these three kinds of connections (for discussion
of all three – associative, iconic and intrinsic – see Juslin and Sloboda 2001).
EACH CLIENT’S UNIQUE JOURNEY AND PATTERN
It seems that people come to GIM seeking some kind of transformation. As
a therapy GIM enables people to explore the transformational processes
described above. They appear to do so at deep internal levels rather than in
seeking transitory solutions or surface changes to their lives – the notion 
of deep structural transformation appears more the focus of the GIM than
temporary change and solution (Zackey 1999). This tends to happen regard-
less of any resistance to the process of therapy. A part of each person seems
to be seeking, often unconsciously, a process of transformation at some level.
Clients use the GIM experience to explore their own process, their own per-
sonal way through the journeys. This makes every process a unique and highly

Transformation, Ovid and GIM
295
subjective experience. Very often a pattern to the images begins to become
established over the sessions with repetitions and variations; a musical par-
allel could be the formal device of theme and variations, each variation bear-
ing some relation to the main theme. Different images are often elaborated
over the sessions in relation to this overall pattern, which is on one level highly
personal but also often contains archetypal material that can help the client
and therapist place the individual experience within a more collective con-
text. In GIM any pattern that continues to occur as a sequence often sur-
faces in different sessions and with very different music. This is another example
of potential transformation, the music again seeming to serve as an agent of
transformation. It also contributes to making the whole GIM experience such
a highly active and creative process.
A main contention of this chapter is that people will ﬁnd within the form
of GIM – within this complex matrix of the ASC, the images and the very
music itself – those ever-changing processes of transformation that they 
are seeking. This may be done consciously, subconsciously or even super-
consciously. Any particular pattern often develops an organic life force 
of its own with unique shifts of rest and change, mini-births and deaths. 
The transformational aspects of these patterns bear some relationship to
Erdonmez Grocke’s notion of pivotal moments in GIM. She describes these
moments ‘as meaningful because they transform some aspect of the person’s
life’ (Erdonmez Grocke 1999: 209).
AN EXAMPLE OF A PATTERN IN A SERIES OF 
GIM SESSIONS
The opening quote from Ovid refers to dying and being reborn; it is these
mini-deaths and rebirths that are so common in therapeutic work. The jour-
ney from loss and dissolution, through fragmentation and ﬁnal transforma-
tion as a rebirth became a central pattern of Kay’s GIM sessions. Reﬂecting
on her series of sessions it is possible to observe how the images related to
each part of the overall progression from loss to rebirth. Time and time again
this overall pattern emerged with different music and through different
imagery scenarios. Ovid will continue to be an inspiration as parallels are
drawn between Kay’s personal exploration of this pattern and more arche-
typal features. The intention is not to present a case study or the minutiae
of her therapeutic process as such but to bring material from a series of ses-
sions to explore the transformational aspects of her main pattern. A further
aim is to explore parallels and links between structures in both the images
and the music. A closer study of aspects of one session will be used to unravel
some of the links between the music and the images.
Kay was in a transition stage in her life. She was changing careers and
during the series of sessions was involved in an arts therapies training

296
Part IV Professional life
course. At the time of the therapy she was in her mid-40s. Her private life
was in a state of ﬂux and transition. She felt very alive in her new training
course and with the members of her training group. She was discovering a
new identity for herself, which was giving her a deep sense of contentment
and fulﬁlment.
Very often the ﬁrst GIM session presents an overview of a pattern and
images that evolve and are evoked during subsequent sessions. At the start
of her ﬁrst session Kay quickly shifted away from the given image of a meadow
to the entrance of a rocky scene (the music was the sunrise sequence from
Ravel’s Daphnis and Chloë – the start of Bonny’s Exploration programme).
She felt lonely and unsure from the very ﬁrst moments of this initial session.
The rocks were comforting but she felt frightened being ‘on the edge’, the
ground falling away to one side revealed a huge expanse. Her subsequent shifts
in images were connected to the different moods of the music – looking onto
another world of an old-fashioned busy street scene during Brahms’ First
Symphony’s Allegretto and moving to a formal garden during Resphigi’s
Gianicola. It was late summer and this garden was full of rocks, water, ferns
and pine trees. She felt stronger and rather wild while putting her back to
the trees. These trees linked to pines on a small island where there was more
water and lakes. There was a brief ﬂying interlude during Debussy’s Sirènes
before feeling cut off on the side of a hill, not knowing where to go. She
merged with a rock, dissolved, broke up the rock into sand and then edged
out of it in the form of a stone creature. She became very ﬂuid sliding in the
mud and she felt this in her stomach. She became the side of the hill, felt on
the outside again as she observed a village below and listened to the church
choir singing (during a choral piece by Tschesnekoff ). Her ﬁnal image (dur-
ing Pachabel’s Canon) was of becoming a very young child, being on her
own in a playpen and feeling trapped and sad.
The elements of air, water and earth were all featured in this opening 
session; the fourth transforming element of ﬁre was to come much later 
in the series of sessions. Being ‘on the edge,’ merging with natural objects,
transforming into creatures before being changed into younger or different
aspects of herself were part of a pattern that permeated this and each of the
other 13 sessions. Reﬂecting on this session it is possible to observe how her
main progression (loss through metamorphosis to rebirth) appeared from the
very outset.
Kay’s particular metamorphosis seems to correspond to the ﬁnal stages
of the ‘Great Round of the Mandala’ as described by Kellogg (1978; also
see Fincher 1991). Stage Ten, ‘The Gates of Death’, is associated with a descent
into the unconscious to seek renewal. The stage ‘represents the death of out-
moded conscious contents and the pain of change’ (Fincher 1991: 126). This
is often a feature of middle life and, as with Kay, can be seen as a need to
reassess both professional and personal aspects of one’s life. It can be an

Transformation, Ovid and GIM
297
anxious, depressing and difﬁcult phase and one that seems to be very much
at a crossroads.
The start of this initial session was difﬁcult for Kay. Her descent into the
unconscious was via an entrance into a rocky and very isolated scene. She
was ‘on the edge’ from the start with the opportunity to move across into
other domains if needed. There was much looking on these different domains
from outside as she shifted between different time frames and spaces. This
position of being ‘on the edge’ was apparent from this ﬁrst session. It would
permeate much of the ensuing work, very much a place of difﬁcult transi-
tion and yet one later described by Kay as ‘the enlivening edge’ (see Intro-
duction and the discussions of threshold and ‘liminal’ experiences).
In the next Mandala stage of ‘Fragmentation’ there is no central core or
unity for the person. Rather there is a loss of physical and psychological bound-
aries. This stage can be observed in Kay’s initial session with the close con-
tact with the natural world when feeling strong against the trees and more
clearly in the image of merging with the rock, when she lost all sense of her
physical self. The former order needed to collapse and to disintegrate. In Ovid’s
Metamorphoses an example of turning into stone is the outcome of Niobe’s
grief for her dead children and husband.
The breeze could not stir her hair, the blood drained from her colour-
less face, her eyes stared in an expression of ﬁxed sorrow. There was 
nothing to show that this image was alive. She could not turn her head,
nor move her arms or legs: even inside her, her tongue clove to her palate
and froze into silence, there was no pulsing in her veins, and her inter-
nal organs were turned to stone: yet still she wept.
(Ovid, Metamorphoses: Book VI)
At these times of disintegration it was very difﬁcult to have any sense of where,
what, or who Kay was. In later sessions Kay, the other elements of water,
air and ﬁre would be part of this breaking-up of boundaries.
In ‘Transcendent Ecstasy,’ Stage Twelve, the process continues with the
transformation of energy into a bursting out and renewal. While there 
was a feeling of being overwhelmed in the previous stage, here the converse
is often the case, with joyful feelings of liberation and release. The stage of
‘Transcendent Ecstasy’ . . . ‘can herald a new integration . . . the space reﬂects
a coming together of the earlier fragmentation through a lustrous eruption’
(Fincher 1991: 132). Kay felt a need to move and climbed out of the rock
as a stone creature. She needed this kind of strong energy to move outwards
and to explore a new form of her image. In this very opening session the
new integration then shifted her back in time into an image of herself as a
very young child, thus completing the circle and beginning anew – ‘death
and birth are often more closely alike than different’ (Fincher: 132).

298
Part IV Professional life
SOME CONNECTIONS BETWEEN MUSIC AND
IMAGE IN ONE SESSION
Bonny’s Comforting programme was used for session seven. Clear shifts relat-
ing to the overall pattern described above could be linked to both surface
and deep structural aspects of the music. Some of the changes in the images
are presented here in relation to what was happening in the music. The main
focus will be on the overall pattern already observed.
Haydn’s Cello Concerto in C: Adagio
Kay moves into an elegant hall full of mirrors. This opening image resonates
with the classical simplicity and formal clarity of Haydn’s orchestral intro-
duction. The pace is slow and the simple walking bass line accompaniment
supports the rise and fall of the opening melody. In a similar manner, Kay
slowly peruses the hall. Rhythmic patterns are repeated and elaborated as
doors lead off into different rooms. Just after the cello’s entrance Kay has
an image of Ophelia moving through the hall. The cello’s line/Ophelia’s mean-
dering evokes feelings of being trapped in circumstances, confusion, sadness
and a tragic sense of the inevitable. At the harmonic shift to the dominant
and the transposition of the opening material the scene shifts to the gardens
outside. Kay is not sure if she is watching or wanting to be Ophelia.
As the tonality shifts to the minor and back again to the major with fur-
ther melodic decoration, Kay has the sensation of not being able to reach
Ophelia. In parallel with the deeper harmonic and melodic shifting structures
Kay is not sure where she is going. Is she reaching deeper into the uncon-
scious? Where is the music going? Where is Ophelia going? At the clear reprise
of the opening material Kay reports a more focused image and states clearly
that she is not Ophelia. In the image she does however still feel rather lost
like Ophelia. She follows the cello as it moves into its solitary cadenza and
this does little to alleviate these feelings of being lost and rather stuck. This
transition phase feels difﬁcult for Kay. There is a ﬁnal and crucial shift in
this movement (part of her usual pattern) when she begins to give up her
form and becomes part of the tree in the garden, rooted to the spot with the
roots extending outwards. The full string four-bar coda seems to accentuate
this rooted sensation. The music comes ﬁnally to rest, as she does in the image
of being rooted under the ground.
Sibelius’ Swan of Tuonela
The image of spreading outwards continues with the slow and ﬂowing
melody of the opening cor anglais solo. The upward climbing phrases on
the ensuing solo cello and viola seem to connect with more extending, the

Transformation, Ovid and GIM
299
roots creeping out and through the earth. The images are beginning to 
move through this commonly observed pattern of fragmentation. As the music
moves to the ﬁrst loud and intense climax there is a further letting go as the
tendrils and roots grow over the edge of a cliff. Letting go into the earth
feels comforting. Kay has come to an edge again, described by her as the
end of something. It is a long way down; there are no lower supporting strings.
It is sometimes light and sometimes dark. Some severe horn calls create more
foreboding and a pull into further darkness. Kay appears to go deeper into
the ASC and darker images. The return of the cor anglais melody creates a
further shift and she momentarily re-forms as herself as she recalls the
recent death of her partner’s father. Kay relives seeing him, his breathing
and being with him as he dies, the long drawn-out ﬁnal chords of this 
desolate piece entraining closely with her breathing, tears, sighs and these
images of ﬁnality. A great deal of sadness is evoked by the memory of her
recent loss.
Villa Lobos’ Bachianas Brasilerias: Number 5
Kay appeared to use this music as a container for a further exploration of
the recollection of the death she was rewitnessing. As words are added to
the melody in the middle section of this piece she notices that her partner is
also present in the scene. In her images no words needed to be exchanged.
Boccherini’s Cello Concerto in B ﬂat: Adagio
There are further shifts and transformations in this movement. She moves
from images of the hospice to seeing herself as a child ill in bed. Her mother
attends her. The cello melody is full of long sustained notes. There is a 
certain timeless and suspended feeling to the music. She recalls the faces of
her parents who currently live a long way away. Expansive phrases in the
music, a crawling bass line under sustained cello notes and an implied
quickening in the music all occur at the same time as a further transforma-
tion in the images. She imagines herself crawling, not in the current image
of a child but by transforming into a tiger. She enjoys the sensation of 
running on all fours up the motorway to her parents’ house. There is more
energy about. She is moving through the ﬁnal stages of her usual pattern.
The music feels stronger and she feels cheerful. There is a further quicken-
ing of the rhythmic patterns as the cello continues to weave its changes. The
phrases fall towards the end of the movement. Kay’s elevated mood shifts,
as the tiger is not made welcome at her parents’ house. The door is closed;
the parents do not understand. Kay feels her parents will try to capture the
tiger and put her into a cage. The tiger withdraws to hide in the woods and
mountains.

300
Part IV Professional life
Susanin’s aria from Glinka’s A Life for the Tsar
The Russian atmosphere of this bass aria connects with a second animal meta-
morphosis. The tiger turns into a snow leopard, standing on the rocks in the
mountains. The leopard imagines hearing an old man singing with his voice
becoming more prominent as more is communicated to the leopard. There
are deep connections here. The leopard hears the old man singing about loss
and sadness (whose loss?) and his hard and poor life living in the mountains.
There is poignant synchrony between the actual words of the aria, even though
sung in Russian, and this part of Kay’s journey. Susanin sings about his 
torment and grief as he prepares to surrender his life for his country. He is far
from all he loves in a dense, dark and inhospitable land of forests and bogs.
He imagines his mutilated corpse lying next morning in this desolate place
with both a crow ﬂying past and (more signiﬁcantly for Kay’s images) a soli-
tary wolf running by. In Kay’s images the leopard makes friends with the
old man (he is not alone) and there is a warmth and affection between them.
Der Neuierige from Schubert’s Die Schöne Mullerin
Here, another male sings about longing and the romantic juxtaposition of
bliss and despair. ‘Does my love love me?’ the singer asks the brooklet. The
leopard and elderly singer share a respectful distance and understanding. They
respect each other’s strengths and differences including a kind of wildness
and independence. Kay moves up into the sky and looks down over the scene.
The snow leopard disappears. The organum-like chords in the accompani-
ment (at the phrase beginning ‘die beiden Wortchen . . .’/‘each small word
comprising my world of bliss or despair’) coincide with this movement and
shift in level. Will the answer to the lover’s question be yes or no? There
seems to be another synchronicity and deep resonance, this time between 
the questioning aspects of the song and the tender, respectful but curious
connections between the leopard and the elderly man.
Debussy’s The Girl with the Flaxen Hair from
Preludes: Book One
One ﬁnal shift and a sense of coming home occur. The previous transfor-
mations have helped Kay, as was her customary pattern, to ﬁnd a new energy
and perspective. She returns to her present self and time frame and enjoys
being with a friend in a café at the top of the mountain. They look out 
over the snow together. Eventually Kay feels held and safe in her friend’s
house back in her own town. This ﬁnal shift seems very connected to the
musical ﬂow of ideas in this succinct and quintessential piece of Debussy.
The deceptively simple strand of melody is held in rich slow-moving chords.
The rhythmic shape of the opening melody is never far away even when it

Transformation, Ovid and GIM
301
is most elaborated. It returns with a feeling of predictability and security at
the end. At last the images now for Kay are those of safety, support, being
held and returning home.
EXAMPLES FROM OTHER SESSIONS
During other sessions the various images that were evoked could be
grouped according to the same stages described above. Examples of the whole
or a major part of her overall pattern were found in all of the sessions.
Stage Ten – Gates of Death
Kay would often ﬁnd herself in a state of transition, being on the edge between
different worlds, for example on the edge of a wood or river. As one super-
visor noted, each GIM session can be viewed as being on an edge, shifting
between different states of consciousness and moving in and out of the 
different images. Kay’s descent over the edge into the unconscious to seek
renewal was typiﬁed by journeys through the four elements of the universe:
earth, water, air and ﬁre. At the beginning of the series of sessions this would
mainly be via the element of earth in the form of rocks, mud, sand, trees
and leaves. This extended in later sessions to moving through walls and parts
of buildings. She would often be held in water, let go through lakes, or move
through rivers or underground waterways. In many instances she explored
the journey through the wind and air, sometimes moving through shafts 
of different colours. Sometimes she would move among different elements
within one session: moving through the earth, into water and eventually soar-
ing into the air, often to create a sense of distance from the image. In later
sessions, the transforming power of ﬁre completed Kay’s exploration of 
all of the elements. The ﬁre images usually began by being external, for 
example being beside a ﬁre or in a ﬁre pit. They became more internal as
she explored and began to recognise and welcome her ﬁre within.
Stage Eleven – Fragmentation
In her images Kay would often quickly lose all sense of boundaries and give
up her previous form. When she moved through the element of earth this
would often involve spreading out through earth and mud; being pulled down
through rocks; breaking up into sand particles or becoming the trunk,
branches and leaves of trees. This spreading-out through trees was a very
common image. In Ovid’s Metamorphoses both Daphne and Myrrha also
move into trees. There are no parallels to be drawn between Myrrha’s and
Kay’s personal stories but Ovid’s descriptions are similar to the way Kay
found her images developing in more than one session.

302
Part IV Professional life
Earth heaped itself round her legs as she spoke and roots, breaking 
out through her toenails, stretched sideways, forming foundations for 
a tall trunk. Her bones were changed into hard wood and through the
marrow, which survived in their interior, ﬂowed sap instead of blood.
Her arms became large branches, her ﬁngers smaller ones, and her skin
hardened into bark. . . . Impatient of delay, she sank down to meet the
wood as it rose, and buried her face in the bark. Though she lost her
former feelings when she lost her body, yet she still weeps, and warm
drops ﬂow from the tree.
(Ovid: Book X)
Kay often found comfort in the early earth-bound images. The fragmenta-
tion became more disquieting when she later found herself blown about as
sand or trampled underfoot as bits of leaves. Similarly, water also created
mixed feelings. During the early sessions she would often ﬁnd a sense of release
from letting go into rivers and lakes. Again there are examples from Ovid
as in the story of Arethusa:
A cold sweat broke out on my limbs, when I was thus trapped, and dark
drops fell from my whole body. Whenever I moved my foot, a pool ﬂowed
out, moisture dripped from my hair. More quickly than I can tell of it,
I was changed into a stream.
(Ovid: Book V)
Later disintegration into water found her formless, dizzy and frightened,
swirling around in a dark underwater passageway. She would ﬁnd herself
initially merging with various colours and then completely losing her sense
of self and breaking up into shafts of light. She often described her move
through these various elements as being both formless and yet highly
formed. In later sessions she used ﬁre images to embody some of the form-
less images, seeking ﬁre to take her away from air- or water-based images.
As noted above there were many shifts between the elements, for example
moving between the sky and woods or moving like a chameleon in and out
of trees. At times she would spread out and fragment across an entire scene,
embracing many of the elements.
Stage Twelve – Transcendent Ecstasy
After becoming disembodied Kay often searched for a new form. This new
freedom and identity would often manifest itself in the form of such pow-
erful animals as tigers and leopards, as in the session described above. The
appearance of animals is often linked to the more instinctive, primitive and
non-rational aspects of our psyche; these appearances were always helpful
for Kay. She allowed their presence to help her move forward and make

Transformation, Ovid and GIM
303
signiﬁcant shifts. They never appeared as terrifying or overwhelming to her.
She would also transform herself into brightly coloured birds or ﬂy on the
top of them. During one late session a bird burst out of the top of a ﬁre (she
sensed she was also on ﬁre), burning away the old as she ﬂew ecstatically
into the air. The bird transformed into a huge and powerful eagle, eventu-
ally breaking out of itself and leaving Kay wrapped in a feathered cloak as
she ﬂew back to the ﬁre. Again it is interesting to read of parallels in Ovid.
He describes the transformation of Daedalion thus:
There Apollo took pity on him and, when Daedalion threw himself from
a towering rock, turned him into a bird and bore him up, to hover on
the wings which he had suddenly acquired. The god gave him a hooked
beak, and curving crooked talons, but left him his one time courage, and
strength greater than his body.
(Ovid: Book XI)
Kay’s images also included transformations into ﬁsh, badgers, a she-wolf,
chimpanzees and more mythic characters including a winged horse, a dragon,
a mermaid and a green man/woman. These new transformations always
brought with them some insight and connections were made with her life;
for example we saw above in session seven that Kay felt very independent,
alive, powerful and free as the tiger. She recognized the strong and power-
ful parts of herself. The water-based transformations were often connected
with feelings of renewed self-acceptance and rebirth. There were also play-
ful and more social images such as the colleagues from Kay’s training group
all turning into chimpanzees dancing and having fun together.
ARTICULATION OF THE PATTERNS IN
IMPROVISED MUSIC
During the ﬁrst meeting Kay had asked about the possibility of incorporating
some improvisation-based sessions into the overall process. She played the
piano. How could the instruments be used to articulate in a different expres-
sive form some of the patterns explored during the GIM sessions? There were
a total of seven improvisation-based sessions at various stages during the
process of therapy. Each lasted for an hour with a standard format of:
(a) opening discussion;
(b) emergence and selection of a theme on which to base the improvisation;
(c) a central period of sustained improvisation using piano and a range of
large tuned and untuned percussion instruments (this part also gave Kay
opportunities to explore movement and dance); and
(d) closing reﬂection.

304
Part IV Professional life
The improvisations were recorded and Kay would take away the recording
for private listening before the next GIM session. These playing sessions took
place in a different physical setting than the GIM.
After the ﬁrst three GIM sessions Kay requested to experience one of these
improvisation sessions in order to play out some of the feelings evoked by
the GIM. In this ﬁrst playing session Kay explored images and themes that
had been evoked during the early GIM sessions, in essence a series of polar
opposites: holding/being held; darkness/light; responsibility/letting go; and
intimacy/separation. She started with a series of quiet repeated C’s then moved
outwards to a climatic, pivotal and central point on large drums and cymbals
before returning to the opening mood. She was held and contained by the
therapist’s musical presence on various instruments yet felt free to move out-
wards and to explore; there was both a feeling of intimacy, connection and
separation; the music was full of a rich contrast of dark and light timbres
and textures. There was a feeling of some transformation having taken place.
Two more GIM sessions occurred before the second of the improvisation
sessions. Kay requested to use the music to explore some aspects of her rela-
tionships with male ﬁgures in her life. She wanted to explore the dynamic
of expressing anger and the various responses that could meet this, includ-
ing a somewhat dead response when she wanted a strong one. During the
music-making the therapist started by representing a more passive role to
Kay’s more assertive playing. She wanted to explore how these two contrast-
ing worlds could meet, change and move potentially to a more balanced 
integration. This approach resembled the ‘splitting’ technique described by
Priestley (1994) when both therapist and client explore the feelings behind
the articulation of polar opposites with both client and therapist taking on
different roles. In this session Kay’s music started softly on the piano before
moving to a loud outburst. The therapist stayed playing soft music and met
Kay’s outburst by retreating further into this dead response. The music became
tense and Kay sensed this in her stomach (as she had done when exploring
this dynamic in a previous GIM session). Kay played more loud outbursts
and invited the therapist to meet her at this level. Eventually both worked
at the same level of loudness and intensity. There was an increased sense 
of being equal partners in the music. Kay listened to the recording and reported
at the next GIM session that she had felt calmer after the playing session,
ﬁnding parts of the co-created music very beautiful. She added that she had
gained an insight into her need to allow other people to deal with issues at
their own pace.
The pattern developed of interweaving a playing session between the
GIM sessions. During the ensuing four sessions of improvisation she
explored aspects of these following constructs: being met/not being met; in/out;
being held back/feeling authentic; feeling safe ‘on the edge’ and intimacy/
solitude. She explored the space in the music therapy room, moving and 
dancing as she played when the mood and the music inspired her. She used

Transformation, Ovid and GIM
305
the improvisation sessions to explore feelings relating to the future of 
her relationship with her partner. She played out her feelings associated with
being the tiger (see above) when her playing was vital, highly charged; she
vocalised spontaneously with strong and loud sounds. At the end of this 
particular session there was more colour in her features and she reported the
sense of getting in touch with her real sense of self and feeling very alive.
There was one last improvisation session before ending the ﬁnal sequence
of GIM sessions. She was tearful during this session. Making music in a safe
setting had evoked feelings of sadness and isolation. She felt moved being
heard and responded to, particularly by a man. In this session she used the
form of one of Satie’s Gnossiennes (a favourite composer) as a framework
for the improvisation. She started by playing the ﬁrst section of the piece
and used the harmonic, rhythmic and melodic features as a springboard for
the improvisation, returning to the theme as a point of reference in the man-
ner of the musical form of theme and variations. This structure seemed apt
for articulating some of the variations of the themes evoked during the GIM
process.
SUMMARY OF KAY’S PATTERN
Most sessions could have been used to explore this overall pattern of loss,
fragmentation, re-forming and eventual rebirth. It was linked to this pattern
that she chose to bring one of Strauss’ Four Last Songs for some joint 
listening in the very last session.
Images of transformation were very creative times for Kay. After a loss
of self and her physical boundaries she would often, in her images, trans-
form into animals to move from one level to the next. This meant a move
from a difﬁcult situation to one where she felt more alive, independent and
free and where almost anything was possible. The energy and power given
to her by these transformations helped her in the transition to move into a
new stage in her professional life and the eventual break with her partner.
These were edges over which she had sufﬁcient conﬁdence and energy to 
both look and move. The transition was not always straightforward, as the
independent tiger within her has also caused her problems, for example in
trying to set up new work. Is there a place for strong, independently minded
and creative people within her team at work? She said after one session ‘Who
would want a tiger in the house?’
As in Ovid’s Metamorphoses, in Kays’ sessions there were frequent
images of transformation into animals. She also moved through the natural
world of all the elements during the series of GIM sessions.
The everlasting universe contains four elements that give rise to bodies.
Two of these, earth and water, are heavy and, by their own weight sink

306
Part IV Professional life
down, while the other two, air and ﬁre, which is more rareﬁed than air
itself, are weightless, and soar upwards, unless something holds them
under. Though these four elements are distinct from each other in
space, yet they are all derived from one another, and are resolved back
again into themselves. Earth is broken up and reﬁned into liquid water,
water becoming still less substantial changes into air and wind, and air
too, being already of the ﬁnest texture, ﬂashes upwards when it loses
weight, into the ﬁery atmosphere above. Then the process is reversed,
and the elements are restored again in the same order: ﬁre condenses
and thickens into air, air into water, and water, under pressure, produces
earth.
(Ovid: Book XV)
The whole transformational cycle begins again.
CONCLUSION
The observable pattern that permeated Kay’s GIM journey has been used
to reﬂect on some of the transformational aspects of GIM. Clearly Kay was
able to use the sessions to move through a transitional stage in her life, one
with both personal and professional implications. She sought out those
aspects of transformation that resonated for her. This series of sessions 
has been used to highlight some of the complex interactions between the 
transformational potential of the ASC, the images and the music in GIM.
Working with music as co-therapist a GIM practitioner is able to witness
profound and potentially life-enriching transformations for clients. As the
Scottish composer James MacMillan has suggested: ‘After all, music has 
the potential to change our lives, but only when we are totally open to its
transforming power’ (Interview in The Independent, 26 March 1999).
Chapter acknowledgements
To Kenneth Bruscia for his encouragement and advice in the preparation 
of this material and his inspirational teaching during the GIM training. To
fellow trainees, a remarkable international group of music therapy teachers.
To supervisors, Catherine O’Leary and Georgette Zackey, who added their
reﬂections on the material from Kay’s sessions. To Denise Grocke for fur-
ther insight into the meaning of Susanin’s Aria. To the editor of The Journal
of the Association for Music and Imagery for permission to reproduce this
material from a previously published article. Above all to Kay for provid-
ing opportunities to witness her many transformations during her GIM 
process and for giving permission for the material to be used again as the
basis for this chapter.

Plate 15.1 Thetis escaping Peleus – transforming into ﬁre, water, a lion and a serpent
(from the base of a Greek cup signed by Pethinos – late sixth century BC)

Endnotes
Leslie Bunt and Sarah Hoskyns
INTRODUCTION
As we near the end of this journey we return to the Introduction’s image of
a threshold. Here we round off some themes and raise some ideas for the
future. During this writing project we have shared hopes and concerns, some
different preoccupations evoked by our own interests and the fact that we
bring our experiences as a woman and a man working in different ways in
this female-dominated profession. We include some pictorial images and
reﬂections on music to accompany these notes. There are also some ﬁnal
thoughts from our colleagues. We have attempted to cover a range of mate-
rial in this handbook in as comprehensive a way as possible. We appreciate
the ambitiousness of this task and that obvious omissions have occurred but
hope that in these closing pages there may be some challenges to offer both
ourselves and other colleagues in the coming years.
ON OUR LINKS WITH MUSIC
A candidate comes to the audition for a music therapy course and plays the
panel some music before being interviewed personally. The choice is a very
technically demanding study by Chopin played from memory. Finger control
is ﬂawless, the scalic passages evenly controlled and Chopin’s precise instruc-
tions observed. Why is it that the performance leaves us cold and the main
music examiner whispers: ‘Where is the music?’ Somewhere, the instinct to
communicate in music has been lost, presenting a problem to someone wish-
ing to train in music therapy.
Perhaps a part of the answer to the examiner’s question lies in the fact that
this candidate failed to understand the true nature of performance in the sense

Endnotes
309
of per-formare, to bring into form. There were no ﬂuid connections between
the inspiration of Chopin and us, the three listeners in the room. Had the
candidate’s emphasis on technical perfection got in the way, placing the per-
former at the centre? In Performance: Revealing the Orpheus within Anthony
Rooley reminds us that:
The true task of the performer is to bring into our sensual world those
things (power, energy, inspiration) which already exist in an un-formed
stage – literally to ‘bring into form’. The performer is then seen as a porter,
a carrier, a transmitter, dipping into the subtle non-formed world and
manifesting it in the tangible world of form.
(Rooley 1990: 25)
Rooley refers to earlier concepts of performance including the sixteenth-
century balance of decoro, sprezzatura and grazia. Decoro focuses on all that
can be studied and prepared, all that is technically correct (there was rather
an overdose of decoro in our candidate’s playing of Chopin). Decoro is 
balanced by sprezzatura that cannot be rehearsed and is ‘a lightning-like energy
which carries courage, boldness, even rashness, and excitement’ (ibid.: 11).
This was deﬁnitely missing from the performance of the Chopin. Grazia is
harder to deﬁne and is a gift, being more connected with numinous inﬂu-
ences, ‘noticed ﬁrst in the spaces between the notes, in the silences rather
than the sounds’ (ibid.: 13).1 In ﬁfteenth-century Florence the physician–
musician Marsilio Ficino (described by many as a second Orpheus – see Voss
2000) was certainly aware of this inﬂuence of the divine in creating both
moments of frenzy and blissful tranquillity in his playing. Ficino was a 
true musician therapist and ‘knew intuitively and in theory that psyche needs
imagination’ (Moore 1990: 203). Perhaps it is time for a reinvention of Ficino’s
notion of ‘musicus’ or ‘musician of the soul’ (Gaggero et al. 2001). We could
also explore his emphasis on musica humana (music of the soul represented
in shifts in human feelings, moods and thoughts) linked with musica mun-
dana (the inherent patterns in nature and movement of seasons and planets)
(Moore 1990).
Orpheus, Ficino and Rooley can be inspirations for both the performer
and musician therapist. Some of these earlier principles regarding perform-
ance go some way in clarifying what is often considered problematical if per-
formance and therapy are linked in any way. As musicians we can employ
the rigour of decoro balanced with the risk-taking of sprezzatura in order to
reveal the Orpheus within. ‘When Orpheus steps forward singing new songs
of divine inspiration, then Euridice is enticed out of the audience and the
oldest reactions of the myth are re-enacted – Orpheus and Euridice are united
1 Ansdell has also alluded to music therapy’s connection with Rooley’s ideas in his chapter on
‘Connecting’ in Music for Life (Ansdell 1995: 217).

310
The handbook of music therapy
in love and harmony’ (Rooley 1990: 115). As therapists we can draw on a
similar balance: patients rely on us to be consistent, effective and well prac-
tised yet able to be imaginative, intuitive and to take risks. We need to be
at the same time highly focused and in tune with our patients yet have the
humility to stand aside and to realise that our responsibility is to serve our
patients and help channel connections between musical inspiration and their
needs.
In the ﬁrst of the two illustrations from Blake’s Book of Job (see 
Plate 16.1) the ‘music’ is still in an unformed state, in fact not even there. 
It is waiting to be sounded with the instruments nestling in the tree. There
is active playing – music coming alive – in the second illustration (see 
Plate 16.2, which is the ﬁnal illustration to the story) although father Job
still looks rather miserable. We can relate this transition from no playing to
playing to Small’s notion of ‘musicking’ (see Chapter 1). We can also recall,
in relation to therapy, Sacks’ description of the loss of a natural ‘musical-
ness’ in a Parkinsonian patient’s movements and her comment that ‘as I am
unmusicked, I must be musicked’ (Sacks 1991: 60). The members of Job’s
family become ‘musicked’ by the end of the story, even if he still seems unable
to smile.
SOME GENDER ISSUES IN MUSIC THERAPY
Blake is a male artist portraying Job, a male prophet. We have celebrated
Ficino and Rooley as male performers who are in touch with ancient tradi-
tions. We have acknowledged the presence of Euridice to create the com-
plete performance (see also Bunt 1994) but it is Orpheus in the quote from
Rooley who does the enticing. To redress the balance immediately at the 
start of this short discussion on gender issues we invite our readers to
explore the music and inspirational writings of the great female mystic, artist,
writer and musician Hildegard of Bingen (1098–1179). Listen, for example,
to A Feather on the Breath of God: Sequences and Hymns performed by Gothic
Voices (Hyperion A66039) and her Play of the Virtues Ordo Virtutem per-
formed by Sequentia (Harmonia Mundi 77051-2-RG). For selected readings
see editions by Fox (1987) and Hozeski (1987) and for her visionary illumin-
ations (Fox 1985). Her timely rediscovery has been instrumental in further
assessing the historical and social position of the female composer.
We feel the time is right to bring a debate on gender issues more into 
view. Within the music therapy literature we have only been able to ﬁnd some 
concluding comments to Brusica’s chapter on ‘Modes of Consciousness’
(Bruscia 1995a). In these couple of pages Bruscia cites female therapists such
as Alvin and Kenny who write about creating safe ‘nests’ (Alvin) and ‘musical
spaces’ (Kenny) and his own work as a male therapist of moving levels of
consciousness across various boundaries and spaces. This is how he ends:

Endnotes
311
The importance of examining and admitting to gender orientation is three-
fold. First, it helps therapists to acknowledge the unavoidable biases that
gender brings to their theories, research projects, and clinical practices,
either unconsciously or unintentionally. This is especially important in
professions such as music therapy, and with techniques such as GIM,
Plate 16.1 ‘Thus did Job continually’. Plate number 1 from The Book of Job by 
William Blake (Copyright The British Museum)

312
The handbook of music therapy
Plate 16.2 ‘So the Lord blessed the latter end of Job more than the beginning’. 
Plate number 21 from The Book of Job by William Blake (Copyright the
British Museum)

Endnotes
313
which have a predominance of one gender (viz., females). Second it adds
to our understanding of the conditions under which male and female
clients need male or female therapists. And third, it points to a real need
for therapists to be able to function from the opposite gender’s point of
view. Male therapists must have free access to their female sides, and
female therapists must have free access to their male sides.
(ibid.: 195)
The themes raised by Bruscia are demonstrated in the following example of
a training exercise.
‘Our identity as therapists’ was the theme of a residential weekend for a group of
music therapists (75 per cent female, 25 per cent male). The group had previously
read Bruscia’s comments and began the session by listening to Elgar’s ‘Dream Children’
to focus attention on the theme. There were two trainers, one female and one male.
The music brought up a lot of material relating to parental inﬂuences and the hold-
ing and boundary issues raised by Bruscia. The men and women divided into two
groups. The men jostled for solo limelight in the music with a tension between being
part of the group and craving independence. They introduced the myth of Narcissus
quite spontaneously and explored the shadow side of male energy especially 
domination and control. There was a discussion on the integration of strength and
mystery after listening to Holst’s ‘Uranus’ from The Planets. The group had a strong
desire to intrude into the female group. The women had been discussing maternal
style in therapy, being strong without taking on the negative attributes of saturat-
ing the space (the myth of Echo – in polarity to Narcissus – arose quite sponta-
neously). They had just started to listen to the beautiful slow movement of Ravel’s
G major Piano Concerto when the men returned and demanded entry into the
space. The way was blocked by the leader but this did not prevent the guitars, dou-
ble bass, clarinet and drum and drum sticks (all that phallic energy) from entering.
Some of the women resisted, some improvised music alongside or with the men,
some echoed, some withdrew. The Ravel was still playing and at the return of the
main theme in the cor anglais all the men stopped their loud playing and knelt
down (as if at a signal) in a circle behind the women’s circle. It felt quite a bizarre,
uncanny yet totally natural moment. The music of Ravel and the female group had
contained the noisy male intrusion. There was no need for any verbal explanation
for this dramatic and metaphoric enactment.
The example provides vividly articulated evidence of the containing and hold-
ing energies of female therapists and the penetrating and invasive energies
of the male therapists. Can only a female therapist know what it really feels

314
The handbook of music therapy
like to offer a client a safe space with clear boundaries? Is a male therapist,
in his very nature, always interested in pushing against the boundaries, want-
ing to get out of the contained space and eager to show clients different routes
out of the situation? In a nutshell are male therapists over-concerned about
provoking and directing and females in nurturing and supporting? Do male
therapists have to work hard on accessing their nurturing sides and female
therapists on pushing against the boundaries? Can we only imagine what it
might be like from the other perspective? Or alternatively do most therapists
just ‘get on with the job’ and draw on whatever energies are required from
within the complexities of their personal make-up depending on the context
and needs of the people with whom they are working?
It is interesting that, allied to these themes of holding and containment,
there is the prominence of theories of mother–child interaction as points 
of reference for much recent music therapy practice in the UK. In spite of
the fact that the profession is predominantly female, these references are
adopted by both female and male therapists alike. In countries where music
therapy has emerged from a predominantly medical background many male
doctors often head the profession. Here it is usually harder for the pre-
dominantly female-based new generation of trained music therapists to
break into the male group and to be heard and given positions of leadership
and responsibility. Splits sometimes arise, particularly if the group of female
therapists comes from a musical background. Perhaps we need to acknow-
ledge more the strengths given to the work by both female and male thera-
pists alike. We can look at these gender issues and themes of containment
and penetration as belonging more to a ﬂexible continuum. The situation 
is more complicated when we bring issues of sexual orientation into the 
discussion.
To conclude this section we indicate how we both perceive the drawing
of the house in Plate 16.3. The image of a house is often considered as a
symbol of self and takes us beyond gender issues to other themes of this book.
SH: On a ﬁrst look at this little house, I think it seems a peaceful and cer-
tain sort of place. But my strongest association with it is a kind of Hansel
and Gretel Gingerbread or Sweet House – intriguing, twinkling, inviting but
with the possibility of being rather dangerous. It is set in a forest – or so it
seems to me – so is there a witch there? I might have to outwit or ﬁght her
if there is. It makes me think of Into the Woods by Sondheim – fairy tales
that take you on a path into the unconscious. It’s a mixture of safe (its con-
struction and clean lines) and risky (I don’t know what is going to happen
there).
LB: I notice the half-open door and can make out the image of a female
ﬁgure from the odd lines on the threshold. This attending female ﬁgure seems
to be providing an invitation into the inner space. This interior has some
sense of the unexplored, the unexpected and possibly mysterious – there is

Endnotes
315
an inner arch – yet the little house or chapel as a whole feels very strong
and safe, a real sense of a sanctuary. This house could provide clear bound-
aries for work. It is also boundaried by trees providing a sense of isolation
but also of protection.
In reality this is another entrance to the very ﬁrst image in the Introduc-
tion to the book. To go forward we return to our beginnings. As in music
our journey has been cyclical, dipping in and out of the various stories of
the patients, clients and colleagues who have accompanied us. Some themes
recur and we conclude with ﬁnal pointers and reminders of some central respon-
sibilities of our work.
Plate 16.3 West Entrance to St George’s Asinou Church, Kakapetria, 
Cyprus (Jonathan Barnes)

316
The handbook of music therapy
SOME POINTERS ON THE FUTURE DEVELOPMENT
OF MUSIC THERAPY AS A PROFESSION
LB: I think that music therapists will continue to work within the areas where
there is growing evidence of our efﬁcacy, for example with autistic children,
the profoundly disabled and the very depressed and anxious. It is here that
the non-verbal nature of music can be seen as a very powerful and effective
intervention. State registration has clearly given the profession a boost but
I am concerned that we avoid any moves to rigid standardisation and over-
bureaucratisation, so much the antithesis to the creative spirit at the root of
our work. What I would like to see in the future is more work in areas that
ten years ago would not have been considered as top priority. We included
some of these areas in Part II such as neurology and forensic psychiatry. I
am also thinking about, for example, work with children and adults who are
living with cancer and other life-threatening diseases, more work in the acute
medical ﬁeld and with children in mainstream schools. I was quite stunned
recently to learn from a survey carried out by MusicSpace West Midlands
that the majority of their urgent referrals were from mainstream schools 
with a large proportion of boys. Here were children whose emotional and
behavioural problems were denying them access to the school curriculum and
causing huge problems in class.
Helen Odell-Miller would like to see ‘a music therapist available for every-
body who needs one’. Elaine Streeter feels that ‘until we begin to look at how
music therapy can work for people with fewer severe difﬁculties we’re going to
remain a small profession’. She sees music therapists working with similar
groups that are seen by counsellors and psychotherapists.
SH: Drawing on some of my experience as parent, being a consumer of early
years’ services I have been very affected by being alongside families’ difﬁcul-
ties in getting early intervention for young children with disabilities. I have
been shocked by the lack of services for diagnosis and support of the whole 
family. This seems to tie in with your points about possible development in
mainstream schools. Likewise it would be extremely valuable to have more
therapists attached to mainstream nurseries (see comments made by Hugh
Jolly in Chapter 1 about the value of music therapy contributing to the early
assessment of developmental needs). We also have tremendous support 
and interest from allied professions such as speech and physiotherapy in the
‘warming-up’ holistic, communicative approach of music therapy. Music 
therapists are developing extra training in family services and our recent 
conferences have indicated excited interest around the country from young
and keen workers and very experienced professionals. It was clear in Chap-
ter 4 how much support Suzanna’s mother gained from her involvement 
in your work with her child: it would be good to see the families of highly
dependent adults getting similar attention. On another track, I have some

Endnotes
317
concerns about the specialisation of music therapy services in dedicated 
music therapy centres (this is rather ironic given both of our involvement in
MusicSpace). How do we preserve the signiﬁcant principle of multidisciplinary
work and arts therapies teams while still raising awareness and funds for the
particular gifts of music therapy?
We both appreciate these optimistic comments from Jean Eisler’s interview
that predict a huge growth in music therapy because of its vitality and human
qualities.
I was at a therapy conference in America recently and there was a splendid chair-
man who summed it up and said: we have all got to realise that within the next
ten years the chief therapeutic input to people will be music therapy. It’s not only
got to be but it will be, because it is so vital. It’s based on every human being’s
vital energies.
Other pointers that we feel need our future attention include:
•
training of people from different musical backgrounds, particularly
non-classical;
•
a real effort to bring musicians from other ethnic backgrounds into the
profession (music therapy is still very much a white, middle-class pro-
fession) but this opens up a debate on the very European and Western
roots of the whole notion of therapy;
•
the development of advanced clinical trainings to bring us more in 
line with directions in Europe, other clinical professions and to safeguard
the future of our state registration through our continued professional
development;
•
increased access to the Internet both as a means of international con-
tact and of collating evidence of effective practice across different client
and patient groups, for example David Aldridge’s creation of the inter-
national Website Musictherapyworld.net;
•
the balancing of these technological advances with keeping alive all of
the personal support, challenging debate and dialogue that takes place
when music therapists meet together, a reﬂection of the very human meet-
ing points at the root of our encounters in music therapy with people
of all ages.
In his views on the future Tony Wigram stressed the need for a larger 
public proﬁle through attending conferences and publications. He also was
realistic about the problems in creating work.

318
The handbook of music therapy
The big crisis that’s developing is how we get work? Increasing pressures on the
money for services and with the development of new management systems it becomes
increasingly difﬁcult for clinicians to enlist other clinicians as was happening in the
1970s and 1980s. You have to present a very good proﬁle. People have to know
about this at all levels, how to present music therapy as an intervention that has
its unique qualities. We have to be able to answer speciﬁc questions particularly
about methods and evaluation. We should have another big international congress
here. It attracts publicity and builds up the stature of the profession.
(Note The Tenth Music Therapy World Congress, Oxford – July 2002.)
A FINAL RETURN TO OUR KEY RESPONSIBILITIES:
TO WITNESS AND TO LISTEN
There are times in our work when all words seem useless, they drag us all
down. There are even times when, dare we say, all sounds and music seem
inappropriate, an intrusion and completely out of place. At such times rest-
ing quietly in the silence, not thinking, not doing, all provides the appro-
priate and very open space for so much to happen. A member of a group
may begin to say something, a child may start to play, some music or sounds
may emerge from somewhere. The atmosphere may lighten and there may
even be some laughter. Dorit Amir has recently beautifully reminded us of
the role of humour in music therapy (Amir 2001) and this is echoed in The
Tibetan Book of the Living and the Dead by Sogyal Rinpoche.
I have found that, as in all grave situations of life, two things are most
useful: a common-sense approach and a sense of humour. Humour has
a marvellous way of lightening the atmosphere, helping to put the pro-
cess of dying in its true and universal perspective, and breaking the over-
seriousness and intensity of the situation. Use humour, then, as skilfully
and gently as possible.
(Rinpoche 1992: 174)
We can attend and witness to all that is not only beyond words, but also
beyond music. We turn to the prize-winning author Ben Okri for some ﬁnal
words and to Plate 16.4 by Jonathan Barnes.
When things fall into words they usually descend. Words have an
earthly gravity. But the best things in us are those that escape the grav-
ity of our deaths. Art wants to pass into life, to lift it; art wants to enchant,
to transform, to make life more meaningful or bearable in its own small

Endnotes
319
and mysterious way. The greatest art was probably born from a pro-
found and terrible silence . . .
I think we need more of the wordless in our lives. We need more still-
ness, more of a sense of wonder, a feeling for the mystery of life. We
need more love, more silence, more deep listening, more deep giving.
(Okri 1997: 5–7)
We wonder how will you reﬂect on these words as you contemplate a ﬁnal
threshold in the last drawing?
Plate 16.4 Entrance to St Gabriel’s Chapel, Exeter Cathedral (Jonathan Barnes)

This page intentionally left blank

Appendix I
Approved postgraduate music
therapy training courses in
the UK
1 The Academic Register
Guildhall School of Music and Drama
The Barbican
London EC2Y 8DT
Tel: 020 7628 2571
www.gsmd.ac.uk
2 The Administrator
The Nordoff–Robbins Music Therapy Centre
2 Lissenden Gardens
London NW5 1PP
Tel: 020 7267 4496
admin@nordoff-robbins.org.uk
3 The Academic Registrar
University of Surrey, Roehampton
80 Roehampton Lane,
London SW15 5SL
Tel: 020 8392 3000
www.roehampton.ac.uk
4 Music Therapy Administrator
Department of Music
University of Bristol
Victoria Rooms
Queens Road
Bristol BS8 1SA
Tel: 0117 9545032
www.bris.ac.uk/Depts/Music
5 Director, MA in Music Therapy Training Course
Anglia Polytechnic University
East Road
Cambridge CB1 1PT

322
The handbook of music therapy
Tel: 01223 363271
www.apu.ac.uk
6 Postgraduate Admissions
Welsh College of Music and Drama
Castle Grounds
Cathays Park
Cardiff CF1 3ER
Tel: 02920 342854
www.rwcmd.ac.uk
7 The Administrator
Postgraduate Diploma in Music Therapy (N-R)
Moray House School of Education
University of Edinburgh
Chessel’s Lane
Holyrood Lane
Edinburgh EH8 8AQ
Tel: 0131 651 6636
Other useful addresses:
The Administrator
BSMT
61 Church Hill Road
East Barnet
Hertfordshire EN4 8SY
Tel: 020 8441 6226
Email: info@bsmt.org
 www.bsmt.org
The Administrator
APMT
61 Church Hill Road
East Barnet
Hertfordshire EN4 8SY
Tel/Fax: 020 8440 4153
Email: APMTofﬁce@aol.com
 www.apmt.org.uk

Appendix II
Resources
The following list shows some recommendations for instruments:
•
a range of drums on stands for stick drumming (for example roto-toms,
tom-toms, tuneable rotary tympani); and for palm drumming (for
example djembes or congas);
•
bongos (lightweight or on stand);
•
tambourine;
•
a range of tambours and/or hand-held drums;
•
a range of gato drums (also known as tongue drums);
•
claves;
•
wood blocks;
•
castanets;
•
temple blocks;
•
maracas;
•
rainstick;
•
guiro;
•
cymbal (14-inch) on a stand;
•
cabasa;
•
Chinese gong;
•
ﬂexatone;
•
large wind chimes on a stand;
•
small hand-held wind chimes;
•
a range of bells: hand bells, Tibetan bells, Indian bells and so on;
•
xylophone (tenor/alto plus soprano for children and bass if budget allows);
•
metallophone (tenor/alto plus soprano for children and bass if budget
allows);
•
glockenspiel (tenor/alto plus soprano for children);
(if possible we recommend chromatically tuned percussion but if outside
budget then with F#s and B ﬂats to allow for some work in different
keys and modes);
•
some kind of plucked instrument, for example a guitar, lyre, cimbala or
autoharp.

324
The handbook of music therapy
We recommend a balance between tuned and untuned percussion. When work-
ing with children (and for some adults) these extras are useful:
•
swanee whistle;
•
bird calls: duck, nightingale, cuckoo and so on;
•
ocean drums;
•
Nordoff–Robbins reed horns and a set of reeds;
•
individual tone bars.
For choice of keyboard, we make two suggestions:
(a) For experienced players: look for a digital piano of professional quality
with an action-weighted keyboard. Some models can also be equipped
with a sequencer and rhythm machine. Price: between £800 and £1,500.
(b) For occasional use by less experienced players: you could choose a 
4-octave portable home keyboard with lightweight but touch-sensitive
plastic keys. This should have general MIDI capability (about 128 high-
quality sounds plus accompaniment styles). Price: between £200 and £400.
Use of technology
•
Compositional and sound-producing programmes like MidiGrid have been
used effectively in music therapy, particularly for client groups with severe
physical and sensory disabilities. For further information and advice, we
recommend contact with the Drake Music Project, 79 East Road,
London N1 6AH, telephone 020 8692 9000, website:
www.drakemusicproject.com
•
Soundbeam: an exciting instrument that produces a wide range of con-
trollable sounds by interrupting an infrared beam through movement.
For information about Soundbeam contact: The Soundbeam Project, 463
Earlham Road, Norwich NR1 7HL, telephone: 0160 356 7788, fax: 0160
350 7877, email: 100530.3530@compuserve.com
•
Music-writing programmes such as Sibelius and Cubase Score are very
helpful tools for presenting notated examples for professional presentations.

Appendix III
Association of Professional
Music Therapists (APMT):
Code of Professional Ethics
and Discipline
1.
Code of Ethics
A member of the APMT in the United Kingdom shall agree in writing
to and thereafter abide by the following code of ethics:
(i)
A Music Therapist shall always act in the best interests of the client.
Among other things this should include:
a)
Refraining from disclosure of conﬁdential information obtained
from or about a particular client except within the multi-
disciplinary team responsible for treatment. Conﬁdential infor-
mation may be disclosed to students on placement, but only 
with the agreement of the relevant authorities (e.g. hospital,
school).
b)
Music Therapists should be aware of and agree to abide by 
their relevant Area Child Protection Committee (ACPC) Inter-
Agency guidelines, as Child Protection is an important issue for
all music therapists regardless of whether their work routinely
brings them into contact with children. Music Therapists have
a duty to pass on information relating to suspected adult to child,
or child to child, abuse and therefore should ensure their ade-
quate training in its recognition. Music therapists should read
the relevant literature in the APMT Information Book.
c)
Before using any verbal, written or recorded information
acquired within the therapeutic relationship, for the purposes
of publication, public presentation or broadcasting, the nature
of the use of such material should be explained to the client
(and/or guardian), and his/her permission obtained. The use 
of case material for articles in professional journals would 
not fall under this clause. In all cases anonymity should be
respected.
d)
Maintaining the client relationship on a strictly professional 
basis.

326
The handbook of music therapy
e)
Maintaining communication with doctors and other relevant 
professionals and advising them of the nature and progress of
treatment.
f)
Seeking advice as necessary from other appropriate professionals.
(ii) A Music Therapist shall ensure that a satisfactory standard of pro-
fessional competence is maintained. Among other things this will
involve responsibility for:
a)
Restricting his/her practice to within the limits of his/her own
training and competence.
b)
Undertaking when possible to attend any courses, conferences,
lectures etc., offered by appropriate organisations in order to
extend his/her range of skills and knowledge.
c)
Maintaining his/her own musical skills at the highest level of pro-
fessional competence.
(iii)
a)
When undertaking private treatment, a Music Therapist should
ensure that a referral from a medical practitioner or from other
professional involved in the treatment of the client is obtained,
unless this is judged to be inappropriate. In all cases, whether
in private practice or other, the therapist should liaise as closely
as possible with those involved in the treatment of the client and
a case history should be obtained.
b)
Department of Health circular hc77 33 September 1977 reads
as follows:
In asking for treatment by a therapist, the doctor is clearly 
asking for the help of another trained professional, and the pro-
fession of medicine and the various therapies differ. It follows
from this that the therapist has a duty and a consequential right
to decline to perform any therapy which his professional train-
ing and expertise suggests is actively harmful to the patient.
Equally the doctor who is responsible for the patient has the
right to instruct the therapist not to carry out certain forms of
treatment which he believes harmful to the patient. (Summary
Para.2 (ii)).
(iv) A Music Therapist shall conduct his/her affairs in a satisfactory 
manner. Among other things this will include:
a)
Maintaining a ﬁtting level of inter-colleague relationship, both
within the profession, with those in other professions and with
his/her employer.
b)
Refraining from giving treatment whilst under the inﬂuence of
alcohol or drugs unless prescribed by a medical practitioner.

Appendix III
327
c)
Refraining from giving treatment unless mentally and physically
ﬁt to do so.
d)
Refraining from delegating duties to unregistered persons,
except in the case of Music Therapy students in training, in which
case full responsibility must be assumed by the therapist for that
delegation.
e)
Refraining from committing any criminal act in the practice of
his/her profession.
f)
Providing suitable premises and conditions for the treatment of
clients.
g)
Insuring the clients against all risks while on the therapist’s
premises. Therapists working in private practice should have 
malpractice insurance.
h)
Acceptance of the minimum current rate recommended by the
APMT for private sessions.
i)
Ensuring absolute hygiene of instruments and equipment, both
for the therapist and client’s beneﬁt. Advice about current
hygiene practices should be sought from the APMT, hospital
pharmacy or other appropriate source.
j)
Legacies and Gifts: Music Therapists should not solicit for per-
sonal ﬁnancial gain. They should neither offer nor accept tokens
such as favours, gifts, legacies or hospitality which might be con-
strued as seeking to promote undue inﬂuence. Where relevant
they should adhere to guidelines or procedures published by
Employing Authorities.
2.
Disciplinary Procedure
Breaches of the code of conduct may be dealt with by a disciplinary sub-
committee of the Executive; this committee will include the Chairperson
of the APMT. Membership of the APMT may be terminated.
August 1999

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aigen, K. (1995) ‘Philosophical Inquiry’, in B. Wheeler (ed.), Music Therapy
Research: Quantitative and Qualitative Perspectives, Phoenixville, Philadelphia:
Barcelona.
Aigen, K. (1996) ‘Being in Music: Foundations of Nordoff–Robbins Music Ther-
apy’, The Nordoff–Robbins Music Therapy Monograph Series 1, St. Louis, MO:
MMB Music.
Aigen, K. (1999) ‘The True Nature of Music-centred Music Therapy Theory’, British
Journal of Music Therapy, 13, 2: 77–83.
Alajouanine, T. (1948) ‘Aphasia and Artistic Realisation’, Brain, 71: 229–241.
Alan, T. (1969) The Aesthetics of Robert Schumann, London: Peter Owen.
Aldridge, D. (1996) Music Therapy Research and Practice in Medicine: From Out of
the Silence, London: Jessica Kingsley.
Aldridge, D. (1999) Music Therapy in Palliative Care, London: Jessica Kingsley.
Aldridge, D. (2000) Music Therapy in Dementia Care, London: Jessica Kingsley.
Alvin, J. (1975) Music Therapy, London: Hutchinson.
Alvin, J. (1977) ‘The Musical Instrument as an Intermediary Object’, British Journal
of Music Therapy, 8, 2: 7–13.
Amir, D. (2001) ‘The Place of Humour in Music Therapy’, Paper presented at the
Fifth European Music Therapy Conference, Naples, Italy.
Andrews, R. (ed.) (1998) Dictionary of Contemporary Quotations, London: Cassell.
Ansdell, G. (1995) Music for Life: Aspects of Creative Music Therapy with Adult Clients,
London: Jessica Kingsley.
Ansdell, G. (1997) ‘Musical Elaboration: What Has the New Musicology to Say to
Music Therapy?’, British Journal of Music Therapy, 11, 2: 36–44.
Ansdell, G. (1999a) ‘Music Therapy as Discourse and Discipline: A Study of Music
Therapist’s Dilemma’, Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, City University, London.
Ansdell, G. (1999b) ‘Challenging Premises’, British Journal of Music Therapy, 13, 2:
72–77.
Ansdell, G. (2001) ‘Musicology: Misunderstood Guest at the Music Therapy Feast?’,
in D. Aldridge, G. di Franco and T. Wigram (eds), Music Therapy in Europe, Rome:
ISMEZ/Onlus.
Ansdell, G. and Pavlicevic, M. (2001) Beginning Research in the Arts Therapies: A
Practical Guide, London: Jessica Kingsley.
APMT (2000a) A Career in Music Therapy.
APMT (2000b) How can Music Therapy Help People with Learning Disabilities?

Bibliography
329
Asbridge, D. (2001) Personal Communication.
Assagioli, R. (1965) Psychosynthesis: A Manual of Principles and Techniques,
Wellingborough, Northamptonshire: The Aquarian Press.
Association for Music and Imagery (AMI) (1990) P. O. Box 4286, Blaine, WA 98231-
42286.
Axline, V. (1964) Dibs: In Search of Self, London: Penguin.
Bailey, D. (1992) Improvisation: Its Nature and Practice in Music, 2nd edn, London:
The British Library National Sound Archive.
Bailey, N. and Cooper, S. (1999) ‘Community Care for People with Learning Dis-
abilities’, British Journal of Learning Disabilities, 27, 2: 64–69.
Barham, M. (1999) ‘The Arts Therapy Profession Comes to the Edge’, in A.
Cattanach (ed.), Process in the Arts Therapies, London: Jessica Kinsgley.
Baron-Cohen, S., Tager-Flusberg, H. and Cohen, D.J. (1993) Understanding Other
Minds, Oxford University Press.
Bartram, P. (1991a) ‘Aspects of Psychodynamic Music Therapy’, Paper presented at
the Scottish Music Therapy Conference.
Bartram, P. (1991b) ‘Improvisation and Play in the Therapeutic Engagement of a
Five Year Old Boy with Physical and Interpersonal Problems’, in K. Bruscia (ed.),
Case Studies in Music Therapy, Phoenixville, Pennsylvania: Barcelona.
Basso, A. and Capitani, E. (1985) ‘Spared Musical Abilities in a Conductor with Global
Aphasia and Ideomotor Apraxia,’ Journal of Neurological and Neurosurgical Psy-
chiatry, 48: 407–412.
Beatty, W.W., Zavadil, K.D. and Bailly, R.C. (1998) ‘Preserved Musical Skills in a
Severely Demented Patient’, International Journal of Clinical Neuropsychology, 10,
158–164.
Bent, I. and Pople, A. (2001) ‘Analysis’, in S. Sadie (ed.), The New Grove Dictionary
of Music and Musicians 1, London: Macmillan.
Berliner, P.F. (1994) Thinking in Jazz: The Inﬁnite Art of Improvisation, University
of Chicago Press.
Bernstein, L. (1976) The Unanswered Question, Harvard University Press.
Bion, W. (1962) Learning from Experience, London: Heinemann.
Blake, W. (ed. G. Keynes) (1966) Notebook for the Year 1810, Additions to Blake’s
Catalogue of Pictures, from the Complete Writings, Oxford University Press.
Bolton, R. (1998) ‘Towards an Understanding of Structure and Process in Jazz
Improvisation’, Unpublished M.Mus. thesis, University of Shefﬁeld.
Bonny, H.L. and Savary, L.M. (1973) Music and your Mind, New York: Station 
Hill.
Bowlby, J. (1969) Attachment and Loss Vol. 1: Attachment, 2nd edn, London:
Pelican Books.
Boxill, E. (1985) Music Therapy for the Developmentally Disabled, Rockville, MD:
Aspen Systems.
Boyce-Tillman, J. (2000) Constructing Musical Healing: The Wounds that Sing,
London: Jessica Kingsley.
British Medical Association (11 June 1991) Personal Communication.
Brown D. and Pedder, J. (1991) Introduction to Psychotherapy, 2nd edn, London:
Routledge.
Brown, S.M.K. (1994) ‘Autism and Music Therapy: Is Change Possible, and Why
Music?’, Journal of British Music Therapy, 8, 1: 15–25.

330
The handbook of music therapy
Brown, S. (1997) ‘Supervision in Context: A Balancing Act’, British Journal of Music
Therapy, 11, 1: 4–12.
Brown, S. (1999) ‘Some Thoughts on Music, Therapy and Music Therapy’, British
Journal of Music Therapy, 13, 2: 63–72.
Bruscia, K. (1987) Improvisational Models of Music Therapy, Springﬁeld, Illinois: Charles
C. Thomas.
Bruscia, K. (1988) ‘Standards for Clinical Assessment in the Arts Therapies’, The
Arts in Psychotherapy, 15: 5–10.
Bruscia, K. (ed.) (1991) Case Studies in Music Therapy, Phoenixville, Pennsylvania:
Barcelona.
Bruscia, K. (1995a) ‘Modes of Consciousness in Guided Imagery and Music (GIM):
A Therapist’s Experience of the Guiding Process’, in C.B. Kenny (ed.), Listening,
Playing, Creating: Essays on the Power of Sound, Albany: State University of New
York Press.
Bruscia, K. (1995b) ‘Differences between Quantitative and Qualitative Research
Paradigms: Implications for Music Therapy’, in B. Wheeler (ed.), Music Therapy
Research: Quantitative and Qualitative Perspectives, Phoenixville, Philadelphia:
Barcelona.
Bruscia, K. (1998) (ed.) The Dynamics of Music Psychotherapy, Gilsum, NH: Barcelona.
Bunt, L. (1994) Music Therapy: An Art Beyond Words, London: Routledge.
Bunt, L. (1997) ‘Clinical and Therapeutic Uses of Music’, in D. Hargreaves and 
A. North (eds), The Social Psychology of Music, Oxford University Press.
Bunt, L. (2001) ‘Music Therapy’, in S. Sadie (ed.), The New Grove Dictionary of Music
and Musicians 17, London: Macmillan.
Bunt, L. (2002) Entry on Music Therapy in A. Latham (ed.) Oxford Companion of
Music, Oxford University Press.
Bunt, L., Burns, S. and Turton, P. (2000) ‘Variations of a Theme: The Evolution of
a Music Therapy Research Programme at the Bristol Cancer Help Centre’, British
Journal of Music Therapy, 14, 2: 62–70.
Bunt, L. and Marston-Wyld, J. (1995) ‘Where Words Fail, Music Takes Over: A
Collaborative Study by a Music Therapist and a Counselor in the Context of Cancer
Care’, Music Therapy Perspectives, 13: 46–50.
Bunt, L. and Pavlicevic, M. (2001) ‘Music and Emotion: Perspectives from Music
Therapy’, in P. Juslin and J. Sloboda (eds), Music and Emotion, Oxford University
Press.
Burns, S.J.I., Harbuz, M.S., Hucklebridge, F. and Bunt, L. (2001) ‘A Pilot Study
into the Therapeutic Effects of Music Therapy at a Cancer Help Center’, Altern-
ative Therapies in Health and Medicine, 7, 1: 48–56.
Carpy, D.V. (1989) ‘Tolerating the Countertransference: A Mutative Process’,
International Journal of Psycho-analysis, 70: 287–294.
Case, C. and Dalley, T. (1992) The Handbook of Art Therapy, London: Routledge.
Casement, P. (1985) On Learning from the Patient, London: Routledge.
Christophers, D. (2001) Personal Communication.
Clark, M. (1999) ‘The Bonny Method of Guided Imagery and Music and Spiritual
Development’, Journal of the Association for Music and Imagery, 6: 55–62.
Clarke, E. (1988) ‘Generative Principles in Musical Performance’, in J. Sloboda (ed.),
Generative Processes in Music: The Cognitive Psychology of Music, Oxford:
Clarendon.

Bibliography
331
Clarkson, P. (1994) ‘The Psychotherapeutic Relationship’, in P. Clarkson and 
M. Pokorny (eds), The Handbook of Psychotherapy, London: Routledge.
Clarkson, P. and Pokorny, M. (eds) (1994) The Handbook of Psychotherapy,
London: Routledge.
Clough, J. (1992) ‘Music Therapy: A Description of Work with a Mentally
Handicapped Young Man’, Journal of British Music Therapy, 6, 2: 16–23.
Cobb, N. (1992) Archetypal Imagination: Glimpses of the Gods in Life and Art,
Hudson, New York: Lindisfarne Press.
Cook, N. (1998) Music: A Very Short Introduction, Oxford University Press.
CPSM (1997) The Council for Professions Supplementary to Medicine Annual Report.
Cordess, C. and Cox, M. (eds) (1996) Forensic Psychotherapy: Crime, Psychodyn-
amics and the Offender Patient, London: Jessica Kingsley.
Cowan, J. (1989) ‘Role Limits in Music Therapy’, Journal of British Music Therapy,
3, 1: 5–9.
Crystal, H. et al. (1989) ‘Preservation of Musical Memory in Alzheimer’s Disease’,
Journal of Neurosurgical Psychiatry, 52: 1415–1416.
Cummings, E.E. (1960) Selected Poems 1923–1958, London: Faber and Faber.
Darnley-Smith, D. (2001) ‘Group Music Therapy for Older Adults with Memory Loss:
Reﬂections upon Meaning and Purpose’, Paper presented at the Fifth European
Congress of Music Therapy, Naples, Italy.
Dass, R. and Gorman, P. (1985) How Can I Help? Emotional Support and Spiritual
Inspiration for Those who Care for Others, London: Rider.
Davies, A. (1996) ‘The Acknowledgement of Loss in Working Through Depression’,
British Journal of Music Therapy, 9, 1: 11–17.
Davies, A. and Richards, E. (1998) ‘Music Therapy in Acute Psychiatry: Our
Experience of Working as Co-therapists with Groups of Patients from Two
Neighbouring Wards’, British Journal of Music Therapy, 12, 2: 53–60.
Davies, A. and Richards, E. (forthcoming) Music Therapy and Group Work,
London: Jessica Kingsley.
Davies, J.B. (1978) The Psychology of Music, London: Hutchinson.
Dawe, P. (1995) ‘Autism and the Viola: A Proposed Model of Working’, Unpub-
lished student project, Department for Continuing Education, University of
Bristol.
de Bernières, L. (1994) Captain Corelli’s Mandolin, London: Minerva, Random House.
de Nora, T. (2001) Music in Everyday Life, Cambridge University Press.
Department of Health Social Services Inspectorate NHS Executive (2001) London
Learning Disability Strategic Framework, DOH Website.
Dileo, C. (2000) Ethical Thinking in Music Therapy, Cherry Hill, New Jersey: Jeffrey
Books.
Dokter, D. (ed.) (1995) Arts Therapies and Clients with Eating Disorders: Fragile Board,
London: Jessica Kingsley.
Dunmore, H. (1997) Talking to the Dead, London: Penguin Books.
Durham, C. (1995) ‘Music Therapy with Severely Head-injured Clients’, in C. Lee
(ed.), Lonely Waters, Proceedings of the International Conference of Music Ther-
apy in Palliative Care, Oxford: Sobell Publications.
Dvorkin, J. (1999) ‘Psychoanalytically Oriented Music Therapy Supervision’, in 
T. Wigram and J. de Backer (eds), Clinical Applications of Music Therapy in Psy-
chiatry, London: Jessica Kingsley.

332
The handbook of music therapy
Edwards, J. (1999) ‘Considering the Paradigmatic Frame: Social Science Research
Approaches Relevant to Research in Music Therapy’, The Arts in Psychotherapy,
26, 2: 73–80.
Egan, G. (1994) The Skilled Helper: A Problem-management Approach to Helping,
5th edn, Paciﬁc Grove, California: Brooks/Cole.
Eisler, J. (1990) ‘Creative Music Therapy for the Mentally Handicapped or
Emotionally Disturbed Child’, in S.S. Segal (ed.), Creative Arts and Mental Dis-
ability, London: AB Academic Publishers.
Eisler, J. (1992) ‘The Cinderella of Music Therapy in Great Britain: Music Therapy
in Child Pyschiatry’, in Proceedings of First European Music Therapy Conference,
Vol. 4, London: BSMT.
Eisler, J. (1993) ‘Music Therapy in the Context of the Multi-disciplinary Team’, Journal
of British Music Therapy, 7, 1: 23–24.
Eisler, J. (2001) ‘The Lot of the Second Twin’, Paper presented at the Fifth Euro-
pean Congress of Music Therapy, Naples, Italy.
Engler, J. (1986) ‘Therapeutic Aims in Psychotherapy and Meditation: Develop-
mental Stages in the Representation of Self’, in K. Wilber, J. Engler and D.P. Brown
(eds), Transformations of Consciousness, Boston: Shambhala.
Erdonmez, D. (1991) ‘Rehabilitation of Piano Performance Skills Following a Left
Cerebral Vascular Accident’, in K. Bruscia (ed.), Case Studies in Music Therapy,
Phoenixville, Pennsylvania: Barcelona.
Erdonmez, D. (1993) ‘Music: A Mega-vitamin for the Brain’, in M. Heal and A. Wigram
(eds), Music Therapy in Health and Education, London: Jessica Kingsley.
Erdonmez Grocke, D. (1999) ‘The Music which Underpins Pivotal Moments in Guided
Imagery and Music’, in T. Wigram and J. de Backer (eds), Clinical Applications
of Music Therapy in Psychiatry, London: Jessica Kingsley.
Erikson, E.H. (1965) Childhood and Society, Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Ferrucci, P. (1990) Inevitable Grace, Wellingborough, Norhamptonshire: The
Aquarian Press.
Fincher, S.F. (1991) Creating Mandalas, Boston: Shambhala.
Flower, C. (2001) ‘The Spaces Between the Notes: Silence in Music Therapy’, Paper
presented at the BSMT/APMT Conference, Children Need Music: Music Therapy
and Children with Special Needs, February.
Forinash, M. (2001) Music Therapy Supervision, Gilsum, NH: Barcelona.
Fox, M. (ed.) (1985) Illuminations of Hildegard of Bingen, Sante Fe: Bear and
Company.
Fox, M. (1987) Hildegard of Bingen’s Book of Divine Works, Sante Fe: Bear and
Company.
Freud, S. (1905) Case Histories: Dora and Little Hans, A. Richards (ed.) (1977) The
Pelican Freud Library, Vol. 8, London: Penguin.
Frohne-Hagemann, I. (2001) ‘Music Therapy Aesthetic Dimensions’, Paper presented
at the Fifth European Music Therapy Conference, Naples, Italy.
Gaarder, J. (1991) Sophie’s World, London: Phoenix.
Gabriel, P. (1996) Eve: The Music and Art Adventure, Real World MultiMedia 
Ltd.
Gaggero, G., Zanchi, B. and Bunt, L. (2001) ‘Musical Interpretation and the Ther-
apeutic Relationship’, Paper presented at the Fifth European Music Therapy
Conference, Naples, Italy.

Bibliography
333
Gale, C.P. (1989) ‘The Question of Music Therapy with Mentally Handicapped Adults’,
Journal of British Music Therapy, 3, 2: 20–30.
Gantt, L. (2000) ‘Assessments in the Creative Arts Therapies: Learning from Each
Other’, Music Therapy Perspectives, 18: 41–46.
Gardner, A. and Smyly, S.R. (1997) ‘How Do We Stop “Doing” and Start
Listening: Responding to the Emotional Needs of People with Learning Disabilit-
ies’, British Journal of Learning Disabilities, 25: 26–29.
Gardner, H. (1985) Frames of Mind: The Theory of Multiple Intelligences, London:
Heinemann.
Gfeller, K. (1995) ‘The Status of Music Therapy Research’, in B. Wheeler (ed.),
Music Therapy Research: Quantitative and Qualitative Perspectives, Phoenixville,
Philadelphia: Barcelona.
Gilroy, A. (1996) ‘Our Own Kind of Evidence’, Inscape, 1, 2: 52–60.
Gilroy, A. and Lee, C. (eds) (1995) Art and Music: Therapy and Research, London:
Routledge.
Gordon, H.W. and Bogen, J.E. (1974) ‘Hemispheric Lateralization of Singing After
Interacarotoid Sodium Amylobarbitone’, Journal of Neurological and Neuro-
surgical Psychiatry, 37: 727–738.
Gouk, P. (ed.) (2000) Music Healing in Cultural Contexts, Aldershot: Ashgate.
Gray, A. (1994) An Introduction to the Therapeutic Frame, London: Routledge.
Gregory, D. (2000) ‘Test Instruments Used by Journal of Music Therapy Authors
from 1984–1997’, Journal of Music Therapy, 37, 2: 79–94.
Hansard 6 March 1997: 2026–2029.
Harvey, J. (1999) Music and Inspiration, London: Faber and Faber.
Hawkins, P. and Shohet, R. (1989) Supervision in the Helping Professions, Milton
Keynes: Open University Press.
Heal, M. (1989) ‘The Use of Pre-composed Songs with a Highly Defended Client’,
Journal of British Music Therapy, 3, 1: 10–16.
Heal Hughes, M. (1995) ‘A Comparison of Mother–Infant Interactions and the
Client–Therapist Relationship in Music Therapy Sessions’, in T. Wigram, B.
Sapertson and R. West (eds), The Art and Science of Music Therapy: A Hand-
book, London: Harwood Academic Press.
Heaney, S. (1996) ‘The Rain Stick’, in The Spirit Level, London: Faber and 
Faber.
Hibben, J. (ed.) (1999) Inside Music Therapy: Client Experiences, Gilsum, NH:
Barcelona.
Higgins, R. (1993) Approaches to Case study: A Handbook for those Entering the
Therapeutic Field, London: Jessica Kingsley.
Hillman, J. (1972) The Myth of Analysis: Three Essays in Archetypal Psychology,
London: Harper and Row.
Hinde, R. (1979) Towards Understanding Relationships, London: Academic Press.
Hinde, R. (1997) Relationships: A Dialectical Perspective, Sussex: Psychology Press
(Erlbaum) Taylor and Francis.
Holland, P. (1995) ‘The Role of Music Therapy in the Effective Use of Stress’, in 
T. Wigram, B. Sapertson, and R. West (eds), The Art and Science of Music Therapy:
A Handbook, London: Harwood Academic Press.
Hooper, J. and Lindsay, B. (1990) ‘Music and the Mentally Handicapped – the Effect
of Music on Anxiety’, Journal of British Music Therapy, 4, 2: 19–26.

334
The handbook of music therapy
Hopkins, G.M. (1953) ‘Binsey Poplars’, in W.H. Gardner (ed.), Gerard Manley
Hopkins: Poems and Prose, London: Penguin.
Horden, P. (2000) (ed.) Music as Medicine: The History of Music Therapy Since
Antiquity, Aldershot: Ashgate.
Hoskyns, S. (1995) ‘Observing Offenders: The Use of Simple Rating Scales to Assess
Changes in Activity During Group Music Therapy’, in A. Gilroy and C. Lee (eds),
Art and Music: Therapy and Research, London: Routledge.
Howat, R. (1995) ‘Elizabeth: A Case Study of an Autistic Child in Individual Music
Therapy’, in T. Wigram, B. Sapertson and R. West (eds), The Art and Science of
Music Therapy: A Handbook, London: Harwood Academic Press.
Hozeski, B. (translator) (1987) Hildegard of Bingen’s Scivias, Santa Fe: Bear and
Company.
Ibberson, C. (1996) ‘A Natural End: One Story about Catherine’, British Journal of
Music Therapy, 10, 1: 24–32.
Isenberg-Grezda, C. (1988) ‘Music Therapy Assessment: A Reﬂection of Professional
Identity’, Journal of Music Therapy, 25: 156–169.
John, D. (1995) ‘The Therapeutic Relationship in Music Therapy as a Tool in the
Treatment of Psychosis’, in T. Wigram, B. Sapertson and R. West (eds), The Art
and Science of Music Therapy: A Handbook, London: Harwood Academic Press.
Jolliffe, T., Lansdown, R. and Robinson, C. (1992) ‘Autism: A Personal Account’,
Communication, 26, 3: 12–19.
Jung, C.G. (1968) The Archetypes and the Collective Unconscious, 2nd edn, trans. R.F.C.
Hull, Bollingen Series XX, Princeton University Press.
Juslin, P. and Sloboda, J. (eds) (2001) Music and Emotion, Oxford University Press.
Kanner, L. (1943) ‘Autistic Disturbances of Affective Contact’, Nervous Child, 2:
217–250.
Kellogg, J. (1978) ‘Mandala: Path of Beauty’, Unpublished Master’s thesis, Antioch
University, Columbia.
Kenny, C.B. (1989) The Field of Play: A Guide of the Theory and Practice of Music
Therapy, Atascadero, California: Ridgeview.
King’s Fund (1980) An Ordinary Life, London: Kings Fund.
Klein, J. (1995) Doubts and Certainties in the Practice of Psychotherapy, London: Karnac
Books.
Koger, S.M. and Brotons, M. (2000) ‘Music Therapy for Dementia Symptoms
(Cochrane Review)’, Cochrane Library, 4, Oxford: Update Software.
Langenberg, M., Aigen, K. and Frommer, J. (1996) Qualitative Music Therapy
Research: Beginning Dialogues, Gilsum, NH: Barcelona.
Lawrence, D.H. (1950) Selected Poems, London: Penguin.
Lee, C.A. (1989) ‘Structural Analysis of Therapeutic Improvisatory Music’, Journal
of British Music Therapy, 3, 2: 11–20.
Lee, C.A. (1990) ‘Structural Analysis of Post-tonal Therapeutic Improvisatory
Music’, Journal of British Music Therapy, 4, 1: 6–21.
Lee, C.A. (1995a) Lonely Waters, Proceedings of the International Conference of Music
Therapy in Palliative Care, Oxford: Sobell Publications.
Lee, C.A. (1995b) ‘The Analysis of Therapeutic Improvisory Music’, in A. Gilroy
and C. Lee (eds), Art and Music: Therapy and Research, London: Routledge.
Lee, C.A. (1996) Music at the Edge: The Music Therapy Experiences of a Musician
with AIDS, London: Routledge.

Bibliography
335
Lee, C.A. (2000) ‘A Method of Analyzing Improvisations in Music Therapy’,
Journal of Music Therapy, 37, 2: 147–167.
Lees, J. and Plant, S. (2000) PASSPORT (Personal and Social Development in
Schools Progression Organisation Rigour Training) – A Curriculum Framework for
the Teaching of Personal and Social Development in Schools, London: Calouste
Gulbenkian Foundation.
Leuner, H. (1984) Guided Affective Imagery, New York: Thieme Stratton.
Levinge, A. (1993) ‘Permission to Play. The Search for Self through Music Therapy:
Research with Children Presenting with Communication Difﬁculties’, in H. Payne
(ed.), Handbook of Inquiry in the Arts Therapies: One River Many Currents,
London: Jessica Kingsley.
Levinge, A. (1999) ‘Music Therapy and the Theories of Donald Winnicott’, Unpub-
lished Ph.D. thesis, University of Birmingham.
Lewis, K. (1999) ‘The Bonny Method of G.I.M.: Matrix for Transpersonal Experi-
ence’, Journal of the Association for Music and Imagery, 6: 63–85.
Lincoln, Y.S. and Guba, E.G. (1985) Naturalistic Inquiry, Newbury Park,
California: Sage.
Loewy, J. (2000) ‘Music Therapy Assessment’, Music Therapy Perspectives, 18: 47–
58.
Loth, H. (1996) ‘Music Therapy’, in C. Cordess and M. Cox (eds), Forensic Psy-
chotherapy: Crime, Psychodynamics and the Offender Patient, London: Jessica
Kingsley.
MacKenzie, K., Matheson, E., McKaskie, K., Hamilton, L. and Murray, G. (2000)
‘Impact of Group Training on Emotion Recognition in Individuals with a
Learning Disability’, British Journal of Learning Disabilities, 28, 4: 143–147.
MacLaverty, B. (1997) Grace Notes, London: Jonathan Cape.
MacMillan, J. (1999) Interview in The Independent, 26 March.
Magee, W. (1995) ‘Case Studies in Huntingdon’s Disease: Music Therapy Assess-
ment and Treatment in the Early to Advanced Stages’, British Journal of Music
Therapy, 9, 2: 13–19.
Magee, W. (1998) ‘Dialogues: In Response to “Lighting up the Mind” by Julia Usher’,
British Journal of Music Therapy, 12, 1: 29–31.
Magee, W. (1999) ‘Singing My Life, Playing My Self,’ in T. Wigram and J. de Backer
(eds), Clinical Applications of Music Therapy in Developmental Disability, Paediatrics
and Neurology, London: Jessica Kingsley.
Malloch, S.N. (1999) ‘Mothers and Infants and Communicative Musicality’,
Musicae Scientiae, Special Issue, 1999–2000: 29–54.
Mansell, J. and Ericsson, K. (1996) Deinsitutionalisation and Community Living, London:
Chapman and Hall.
Mark, P. (1986) ‘Offending Behaviour or Better Adjusted Criminals?’, Probation Journal,
33: 127–131.
McMaster, N. (1991) ‘Reclaiming a Positive Identity: Music Therapy in the
Aftermath of a Stroke’, in K. Bruscia (ed.), Case Studies in Music Therapy,
Phoenixville, Pennsylvania: Barcelona.
Michel, D. (2000) ‘An Assessment of Music Therapy Over the Past Fifty Years and
a Vision of its Future’, Music Therapy Perspectives, 18: 72–77.
Miller, L., Rustin, M. and Shuttleworth, J. (1989) Closely Observed Infants, London:
Duckworth.

336
The handbook of music therapy
Moog, H. (1976) The Musical Experience of the Pre-school Child, London: Schott.
Moore, G. (1962) Am I too Loud: Memoirs of an Accompanist, London: Hamish
Hamilton.
Moore, T. (1990) The Planets Within: The Astrological Psychology of Marsilio
Ficino, Great Barrington, MA: Lindisfarne Press.
Moore, T. (1992) Care of the Soul, London: Judy Piatkus.
Murphy, M. (1991) ‘The Treatment of a Depressed Woman Following Neurological
Trauma’, in K. Bruscia (ed.), Case Studies in Music Therapy, Phoenixville,
Pennsylvania: Barcelona Publishers.
Murray, G., McKenzie, K., Kidd, G., Lakhani, S. and Sinclair, B. (1998) ‘The Five
Accomplishments: A Framework for Obtaining Customer Feedback in a Health
Service Community Learning Disability Team’, British Journal of Learning Dis-
abilities, 26, 3: 146.
Nachmanovitch, S. (1990) Free Play: Improvisation in Life and Art, New York: Penguin
Putman.
Nettl, B. (2001) ‘Improvisation’, in S. Sadie (ed.), The New Grove Dictionary of Music
and Musicians 12, London: Macmillan.
Nind, M. and Hewett, D. (1994) Access to Communication, London: David Fulton.
Nordoff, P. (1976) Parents and Children, BBC Television.
Nordoff, P. and Robbins, C. (1971) Therapy in Music for Handicapped Children,
London: Gollancz.
Nordoff, P. and Robbins, C. (1977) Creative Music Therapy, New York: John Day.
Odell, H. (1979) ‘Music Therapy in SSN Hospitals’, Report of BSMT meeting in British
Journal of Music Therapy, 10, 4: 12–15.
Odell-Miller, H. (1991) ‘The Experience of a Man with Schizophrenia’, in K. Bruscia
(ed.), Case Studies in Music Therapy, Phoenixville, Pennsylvania: Barcelona
Publishers.
Odell-Miller, H. (1995) ‘Approaches to Music Therapy in Psychiatry with Speciﬁc
Emphasis upon a Research Project with the Elderly Mentally Ill’, in T. Wigram,
B. Sapertson and R. West (eds), The Art and Science of Music Therapy: A
Handbook, London: Harwood Academic Press.
Odell-Miller, H. (1997) ‘Music Therapy and the Functions of Music with Older Mentally
Ill People in a Continuing Care Setting’, in M. Denham (ed.), Continuing Care for
Older People, Cheltenham: Stanley Thornes.
Odell-Miller, H. (1999) ‘Investigating the Value of Music Therapy in Psychiatry’, 
in T. Wigram and J. de Backer (eds), Clinical Applications of Music Therapy in
Psychiatry, London: Jessica Kingsley.
Okri, B. (1997) A Way of Being Free, London: Phoenix.
Oldﬁeld, A. and Adams, M. (1990) ‘The Effects of Music Therapy on a Group 
of Profoundly Mentally Handicapped Adults’, Journal of Mental Deﬁciency
Research, 34, 2: 107–125.
Oldﬁeld, A., Bunce, L. and Adams, M. (2001) ‘Mum Can Play Too: Short-term Music
Therapy with Mothers and Young Children’, British Journal of Music Therapy,
15, 2: 27–36.
Orton, R. (1992) ‘From Improvisation to Composition’, in J. Paynter, T. Howell, R.
Orton and P. Seymour (eds), The Companion to Contemporary Musical Thought,
London: Routledge.
Ovid, Metamorphoses, translation by Mary M. Innes (1955), London: Penguin Books.

Bibliography
337
Papous
ˇek, M. (1996) ‘Intuitive Parenting: A Hidden Source of Musical Stimulation
in Infancy’, in I. Deliège and J. Sloboda (eds), Musical Beginnings, Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Pavlicevic, M. (1990) ‘Dynamic Interplay in Clinical Improvisation’, British Journal
of Music Therapy, 4, 2: 5–9.
Pavlicevic, M. (1995a) ‘Music and Emotion: Aspects of Music Therapy Research’,
in A. Gilroy and C. Lee (eds), Art and Music: Therapy and Research, London:
Routledge.
Pavlicevic, M. (1995b) ‘Interpersonal Processes in Clinical Improvisation: Towards
a Subjectively Objective Systematic Deﬁnition,’ in T. Wigram, B. Saperston and
R. West (eds), The Art and Science of Music Therapy: A Handbook, London: Har-
wood Academic Press.
Pavlicevic, M. (1997) Music Therapy in Context: Music, Meaning, and Relationship,
London: Jessica Kingsley.
Pavlicevic, M. (1999a) Music Therapy: Intimate Notes, London: Jessica Kingsley.
Pavlicevic, M. (1999b) ‘Thoughts, Words and Deeds: Harmonies and Counterpoints
in Music Therapy Theory’, British Journal of Music Therapy, 13, 2: 59–63.
Pavlicevic, M. (2001) ‘A Child in Time and Health: Guiding Images in Music
Therapy’, British Journal of Music Therapy, 15, 1: 14–21.
Pavlicevic, M. and Trevarthen, C. (1989) ‘A Musical Assessment of Psychiatric
States in Adults’, Psychopathology, 22, 6: 325–334.
Payne, H. (ed.) (1993) Handbook of Inquiry in the Arts Therapies: One River, Many
Currents, London: Jessica Kingsley.
Pedersen, I.N. (1999) ‘Music Therapy as Holding and Re-organizing Work with
Schizophrenic and Psychotic Patients’, in T. Wigram and J. de Backer (eds),
Clinical Applications of Music Therapy in Psychiatry, London: Jessica Kingsley.
Pelham, G. and Stacy, J. (1999) Counselling Skills for Creative Arts Therapists, London:
Worth Publishing.
Phillips, A. (1998) The Beast in the Nursery, London: Faber and Faber.
Pines, M. (2000) ‘Interpretation: Why, for Whom and When?’, in D. Kennard, J.
Roberts and D. Winter, A Workbook of Group-analytic Interventions, London: Jessica
Kingsley.
Pribham, K. (1993) ‘Brain, Music and Meaning’, Keynote paper given at the
Seventh World Congress of Music Therapy, Vitoria, Spain.
Priestley, M. (1975) Music Therapy in Action, London: Constable.
Priestley, M. (1994) Essays on Analytical Music Therapy, Phoenixville: Barcelona.
Purdie, H. and Baldwin, S. (1994) ‘Music Therapy: Challenging Low Self-esteem in
People with a Stroke’, Journal of British Music Therapy, 8, 2: 19–24.
Racker, H. (1968) Transference and Countertransference, London: Hogarth.
Reason, P. and Rowan, J. (1981) Human Inquiry: A Sourcebook of New Paradigm
Research, London: John Wiley.
Richer, J.M. (1983) ‘The Development of Social Avoidance in Autistic Children’, in
A. Oliveiro and M. Zappella (eds), The Behaviour of Human Infants, New York:
Plenum Press.
Richer, J.M. (2001) ‘An Ethological Approach to Autism: From Evolutionary
Perspectives to Treatment’, in J. Richer and S. Coates (eds), Autism: The Search
for Coherence, London: Jessica Kingsley.
Rinpoche, S. (1992) The Tibetan Book of the Living and the Dead, London: Rider Books.

338
The handbook of music therapy
Ritchie, F. (1991) ‘Behind Closed Doors: A Case Study’, Journal of British Music
Therapy, 5, 2: 4–10.
Robarts, J. (1996) ‘Music Therapy for Autistic Children’, in C. Trevarthen, K.
Aitken, D. Papoudi and J. Robarts (eds), Children with Autism: Diagnosis and
Interventions to Meet their Needs, London: Jessica Kingsley.
Robarts, J. (ed.) (forthcoming) Music Therapy Research: Growing Perspectives in Theory
and Practice, Vol. 2, London: BSMT Publications.
Robarts, J. and Sloboda, A. (1994) ‘Perspectives on Music Therapy with People
Suffering from Anorexia Nervosa’, Journal of British Music Therapy, 8, 1: 7–15.
Robbins, C. (2000) Personal Communication.
Robbins, C. and Robbins, C. (1991) ‘Creative Music Therapy in Bringing Order, 
Change and Communicativeness to the Life of a Brain-injured Adolescent’, in 
K. Bruscia (ed.), Case Studies in Music Therapy, Phoenixville, Pennsylvania:
Barcelona.
Rogers, C. (1980) A Way of Being, Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Rogers, P. (1992) ‘Issues in Working with Sexually Abused Clients in Music Ther-
apy’, British Journal of Music Therapy, 6, 2: 5–16.
Rogers, P. (1993) ‘Research in Music Therapy with Sexually Abused Clients’, in 
H. Payne (ed.), Handbook of Inquiry in the Arts Therapies: One River, Many Currents,
London: Jessica Kingsley.
Rogers, P. (2000) ‘Truth or Illusion: Evidence-based Practice in the Real World’, in
J.Z. Robarts (ed.), Music Therapy Research: Growing Perspectives in Theory and
Practice, Vol. 1, London: British Society for Music Therapy.
Rooley, A. (1990) Performance: Revealing the Orpheus Within, Shaftesbury, Dorset:
Element.
Rowan, J. (1993) The Transpersonal: Psychotherapy and Counselling, London:
Routledge.
Ruud, E. (1995) ‘Improvisation as a Liminal Experience: Jazz and Music Therapy
as Modern “Rites de Passage” ’, in C.B. Kenny (ed.), Listening, Playing, Creating:
Essays on the Power of Sound, Albany: State University of New York.
Ruud, E. (1998) Music Therapy: Improvisation, Communication and Culture, Gilsum,
NH: Barcelona.
Ryan, J. and Thomas, F. (1987) The Politics of Mental Handicap, London: Free
Association Books.
Sackett, D.L., Rosenberg, W.M.C., Gray, J.A.M. et al. (1996) ‘Evidence-based
Medicine: What it Is and What it Isn’t’, British Medical Journal, 312: 71–72.
Sacks, O. (1985) The Man who Mistook his Wife for a Hat, London: Picador.
Sacks, O. (1991) Awakenings, revised edn, London: Pan.
Samson, S. and Zatorre, R.J. (1993) ‘Contribution of the Right Temporal Lobe to
Musical Timbre Discrimination’, Neuropsychologia, 32, 2: 231–240.
Santos, K. and Loth, H. (1993) ‘Music Therapy in Forensic Psychiatry’, Paper pre-
sented at the Seventh World Congress of Music Therapy, Vitoria, Spain, July.
Shah, I. (1964) The Suﬁs, London: Octagon Press.
Sidoli, M. (1998) ‘Hearing the Roar’, Journal of Analytical Psychology, 43, 1: 23–33.
Siegel, S. (1956) Nonparametric Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences, New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Simpson, F. (2000) ‘Creative Music Therapy: A Last Resort?’, in D. Aldridge (ed.),
Music Therapy in Dementia Care, London: Jessica Kingsley.

Bibliography
339
Sinason, V. (1992) Mental Handicap and the Human Condition, London: Free
Association Books.
Sines, D. (1988) ‘Maintaining an Ordinary Life’, in D. Sines (ed.), Towards Integra-
tion: Comprehensive Services for People with Mental Handicaps, London: Chapman
and Hall.
Skille, O. and Wigram, T. (1995) ‘The Effects of Music, Vocalisation and Vibration
on Brain and Muscle Tissue: Studies in Vibroacoustic Therapy’, in T. Wigram, B.
Saperston and R. West (eds), The Art and Science of Music Therapy: A Handbook,
London: Harwood Academic Press.
Sloboda, A. (1996) ‘Music Therapy and Psychotic Violence’, in E. Welldon and 
C. van Velsen (eds), A Practical Guide to Forensic Psychotherapy, London: Jessica
Kingsley.
Sloboda, J.A. (1985) The Musical Mind: The Cognitive Psychology of Music, Oxford
University Press.
Small, C. (1998) Musicking, Hanover, NH: Wesleyan University Press.
Smeijsters, H. (1997) Multiple Perspectives: A Guide to Qualitative Research in Music
Therapy, Gilsum, NH: Barcelona.
Snedecor, G.W. and Cochrane, W.G. (1980) Statistical Methods, 7th edn, Aimes, Iowa:
Iowa State University Press.
Sobey, K. (1992) ‘Relatedness in Music Therapy and Psychotherapy’, Journal of British
Music Therapy, 6, 1: 19–21.
Sobey, K. (1993) ‘Out of Sight – Out of Mind? Reﬂections on a Blind Young Woman’s
Use of Music Therapy’, Journal of British Music Therapy, 7, 2: 5–12.
Sobey, K. and Woodcock, J. (1999) ‘Psychodynamic Music Therapy: Considerations
in Training’, in A. Cattanach (ed.), Process in the Arts Therapies, London: Jessica
Kinsgley.
Solomon, A.L. (1995) ‘Historical Research’, in B. Wheeler (ed.), Music Therapy Research:
Quantitative and Qualitative Perspectives, Phoenixville, Philadelphia: Barcelona.
Spingte, R. (1998a) ‘Introductory Comments’, in R.R. Pratt and D.E. Grocke (eds),
MusicMedicine 3 MusicMedicine and Music Therapy: Expanding Horizons, Mel-
bourne, Australia: Faculty of Music, University of Melbourne.
Spingte, R. (1998b) ‘MusicMedicine: Applications, Standards and Deﬁnitions’, in 
R.R. Pratt and D.E. Grocke (eds), MusicMedicine 3 MusicMedicine and Music
Therapy: Expanding Horizons, Melbourne, Australia: Faculty of Music, Univer-
sity of Melbourne.
Steele, P. (1988) ‘Children’s Use of Music Therapy’, Paper presented at the British
Society for Music Therapy Conference, London: BSMT.
Steele, P. (1991) ‘Aspects of Psychodynamic Music Therapy’, Unpublished paper pre-
sented at the Scottish Music Therapy Conference.
Steele, P. and Leese, K. (1987) ‘The Music Therapy Interactions of One Session with
a Physically Disabled Boy’, British Journal of Music Therapy, 1, 1: 7–12.
Stern, D. (1985) The Interpersonal World of the Infant: A View from Psychoanalysis
and Developmental Psychology, London: Academic Press.
Stevens, J. (1985) Search and Reﬂect: A Music Workshop Handbook, London: Com-
munity Music Ltd.
Stewart, D. (1996) ‘Chaos, Noise and a Wall of Silence: Working with Primitive Affects
in Psychodynamic Group Music Therapy’, British Journal of Music Therapy, 10,
2: 21–34.

340
The handbook of music therapy
Stewart, D. (2000) ‘The State of the UK Music Therapy Profession: Personal Qualit-
ies, Working Models, Support Networks and Job Satisfaction’, British Journal of
Music Therapy, 14, 1: 13–32.
Stige, B. (1998) ‘Perspectives on Meaning in Music Therapy’, British Journal of Music
Therapy, 12, 1: 20–29.
Stige, B. (2001) ‘Writing Music Therapy: Clinical Research as Ethnography’, in 
D. Aldridge, G. di Franco and T. Wigram (eds), Music Therapy in Europe, Rome:
ISMEZ/Onlus.
Sting (1998) ‘Music and Silence’, Resurgence, November/December, 191, 32–33.
Stokes, J. (1987) ‘Insights from Psychotherapy’, International Symposium on Mental
Handicap, Royal Society of Medicine.
Storr, A. (1997) Music and the Mind, London: HarperCollins.
Streeter, E. (1978) ‘The Role of Music Therapy in the Assessment and Treatment of
a Pre-school Language Delayed Child’, British Journal of Music Therapy, 9, 1: 2–6.
Streeter, E. (1979) ‘A Theoretical Background to the Interpretation of Rhythmic Skills
with Particular Reference to the Use of Music Therapy as an Aid to the Clinical
Assessment of Pre-school Handicapped Children’, Unpublished MA thesis,
University of York.
Streeter, E. (1999a) ‘Finding a Balance between Psychological Thinking and Mus-
ical Awareness in Music Therapy Theory’, British Journal of Music Therapy, 13,
1: 5–21.
Streeter, E. (1999b) ‘Deﬁnition and Use of the Musical Transference Relationship’,
in T. Wigram and J. de Backer (eds), Clinical Applications of Music Therapy in
Psychiatry, London: Jessica Kingsley.
Streeter, E. (2001) Making Music with the Young Child with Special Needs: A Guide
for Parents, London: Jessica Kingsley.
Swartz, K., Hantz, E., Crummer, G., Walton, J. and Frishna, R. (1989) ‘Does the
Melody Linger On? Music Cognition in Alzheimer’s Disease’, Seminars in Neuro-
logy, 9: 152–158.
Tarnas, R. (1991) The Passion of the Western Mind, London: Pimlico.
Tate, D. (1958) ‘On Ego Development’, Journal of Analytical Psychology, 3, 2: 149–
155.
Tavistock and Portman NHS Trust (2001) Learning Disability Service New Update,
London: Tavistock and Portman NHS Trust.
Tessimond, A.S.J. (1985) ‘This is not Love Perhaps’, in H. Nicholson (ed.), Collected
Poems, University of Reading: Whiteknights Press.
Tinbergen N. and Tinbergen, E.A. (eds) (1983) Autistic Children: New Hope for Cure,
London: Allen & Unwin.
Tingle, E. (2000) ‘Searching for the Meeting Place: A Study of Moments of Contact
between Client and Therapist in a Music Therapy Session’, Unpublished M.Phil.
thesis, University of Bristol.
Toolan P. and Coleman, S. (1995) ‘Music Therapy: A Description of Process:
Engagement and Avoidance in Five People with Learning Difﬁculties’, British Journal
of Music Therapy, 9, 1: 17–25.
Torbert, W.R. (1981) ‘Why Educational Research has been so Uneducational: The
Case for a New Model of Social Science Based on Collaborative Inquiry’, in 
P. Reason and J. Rowan (eds), Human Inquiry: A Sourcebook of New Paradigm
Research, Chichester: John Wiley.

Bibliography
341
Towse, E. (1995) ‘Listening and Accepting’, in T. Wigram, B. Saperston and R. West
(eds), The Art and Science of Music Therapy: A Handbook, London: Harwood
Academic Press.
Towse, E. (1997) ‘Group Analysis and Improvisation: A Musical Perspective’,
British Journal of Music Therapy, 11, 2: 51–56.
Towse, E. and Flower, C. (1993) ‘Levels of Interaction in Group Improvisation’, in
M. Heal and T. Wigram (eds), Music Therapy in Health and Education, London:
Jessica Kingsley.
Trehub, S., Schellenberg, G. and Hill, D. (1997) ‘The Origins of Music Perception
and Cognition: A Developmental Perspective’, in C. Deliège and J. Sloboda (eds),
Perception, Cognition and Music, Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Trevarthen, C. (1993) ‘The Function of Emotions in Early Infant Communication
and Development’, in J. Nadel and L. Camaioni (eds), New Perspectives in Early
Communicative Development, London: Routledge.
Trevarthen, C. (1999) ‘Musicality and the Intrinsic Motive Pulse: Evidence from Human
Psychobiology and Infant Communication’, Musicae Scientiae, Special Issue,
1999–2000: 155–211.
Trevarthen, C. and Malloch, S.N. (2000) ‘The Dance of Wellbeing: Deﬁning the Musical
Therapeutic Effect’, Nordic Journal of Music Therapy, 9, 2: 3–17.
Tustin, F. (1992) Autistic States in Children, London: Routledge.
Tyler, H. (1999) Personal Communication.
Tyler, H. (2000) ‘The Music Therapy Profession in Modern Britain’, in P. Horden
(ed.), Music as Medicine: The History of Music Therapy since Antiquity, Aldershot:
Ashgate.
Usher, J. (1998) ‘Lighting up the Mind: Evolving a Model of Consciousness and its
Application to Improvisation in Music Therapy’, British Journal of Music Ther-
apy, 12, 1: 4–19.
Verney, R. (2001) ‘Fine Tuning: Musical Listening During and After Music Therapy
Sessions’, Paper Presented at the BSMT/APMT Conference Children Need Music:
Music Therapy and Children with Special Needs, February.
Voss, A. (2000) ‘Marsilio Ficino, the Second Orpheus’, in P. Horden (ed.), Music as
Medicine: The History of Music Therapy since Antiquity, Aldershot: Ashgate.
Warwick, A. (1995) ‘Music Therapy in the Education Service: Research with Autistic
Children and their Mothers’, in T. Wigram, B. Saperston and R. West (eds), The
Art and Science of Music Therapy: A Handbook, London: Harwood Academic Press.
Welldon, E. and van Velsen, C. (1996) A Practical Guide to Forensic Psychother-
apy, London: Jessica Kingsley.
Wheeler, B. (ed.) (1995) Music Therapy Research: Quantitative and Qualitative
Perspectives, Phoenixville, Philadelphia: Barcelona.
Whittaker, A. and McIntosh, B. (2000) ‘Changing Days’, British Journal of Learning
Disabilities, 28, 1: 3–8.
Wigram, T. (1995) ‘A Model of Assessment and Differential Diagnosis of Handicap
in Children through the Medium of Music Therapy’, in T. Wigram, B. Saperston
and R. West (eds), The Art and Science of Music Therapy: A Handbook, London:
Harwood Academic Press.
Wigram, T. (2000) ‘A Method of Music Therapy Assessment for the Diagnosis of
Autism and Communication Disorders in Children’, Music Therapy Perspectives,
18: 13–22.

342
The handbook of music therapy
Wigram, T. and Dileo, C. (1997) Music Vibration, Cherry Hill, New Jersey: Jeffrey
Books.
Wigram, T. and de Backer, J. (1999a) Clinical Applications of Music Therapy in
Developmental Disability, Paediatrics and Neurology, London: Jessica Kingsley.
Wigram, T. and de Backer, J. (1999b) Clinical Applications of Music Therapy in Psy-
chiatry, London: Jessica Kingsley.
Wigram, T., Saperston, B. and West, R. (1995) The Art and Science of Music Ther-
apy: A Handbook, London: Harwood Academic Press.
Wilber, K. (1983) Eye to Eye: The Quest for the New Paradigm, Boston: Shambhala.
Wilber, K. (1993) No Boundary: Eastern and Western Approaches to Personal Growth,
Boston: Shambhala.
Wilber, K. (1998) The Marriage of Sense and Soul: Integrating Science and Religion,
Dublin: Newleaf.
Wilber, K. (2000) Integral Psychology: Consciousness, Spirit, Psychology, Therapy,
Boston: Shambhala.
Wilber, K., Engler, J. and Brown, D.P. (1986) Transformations of Consciousness, Boston:
Shambhala.
Williams, D. (1996) Autism – an Inside-out Approach, London: Jessica Kingsley.
Williams, W.E. (1950) Introduction to DH Lawrence: Selected Poems, London:
Penguin.
Wilson, B.L. and Smith, D.S. (2000) ‘Music Therapy Assessment in School Settings:
A Preliminary Investigation’, Journal of Music Therapy, 37, 2: 95–117.
Wing, C. (1968) ‘Music Therapy in a Hospital for Subnormal Adults’, British
Journal of Music Therapy, Autumn: 4–10.
Wing, L. (1993) Autistic Continuum Disorders: An Aid to Diagnosis, London:
National Autistic Society.
Winnicott, D.W. (1965) The Family and Individual Development, London: Tavistock.
Winnicott, D.W. (1974) Playing and Reality, London: Penguin Books.
Winnicott, D.W. (1986) Home is Where We Start From, London: Pelican Books.
Winnicott, D.W. (1990) Maturational Processes and the Facilitating Environment,
London: Karnac Books and the Institute of Psychoanalysis.
Woodcock, J. (1987) ‘Towards Group Analytic Music Therapy’, Journal of British
Music Therapy, 1, 1: 16–22.
Woodcock, J. and Lawes, C. (1995) ‘Music Therapy and People with Severe
Learning Difﬁculties who Exhibit Self-injurious Behaviour’, in T. Wigram, B.
Saperston and R. West (eds), The Art and Science of Music Therapy: A Handbook,
London: Harwood Academic Publishers.
World Health Organisation (1992) International Classiﬁcation of Diseases, World Health
Organisation.
Zackey, G. (1999) Personal Communication.
Zanchi, B. (2001) Personal Communication.
Zeldin, T. (1995) An Intimate History of Humanity, London: Minerva.
Zulueta, F. de (1993) From Pain to Violence: The Traumatic Roots of Destructiveness,
London: Whurr.

Abba 129
Achenbach, C. 234
Adams, M. 100
Aigen, K. 24, 87, 273
Alan, T. 3
Alajouanine, T. 150
Aldridge, D. 18–19, 23, 131, 149–52,
154–5, 159, 271, 317
Alvin, J. 4, 12, 54, 61–4, 99–100, 154,
198, 242, 310
Amir, D. 318
Andrews, R. 163
Andsell, G. 20–4, 53, 131, 271–2, 281,
309
Asbridge, D. 9
Assagioli, R. 49, 233
Axline, V. 172–3
Bach, J.S. 204
Bailey, D. 49–50, 144
Bailey, N. 98
Backer, J. de 18, 20, 65, 100
Baldwin, S. 117
Barber, S. 145
Barclay, P. 17
Barham, M. 11
Baron-Cohen, S. 84
Bartok, B. 199
Bartram, P. 154
Basso, A. 150
Baum, D. 15, 173
Bean, J. 233
Beatles (the) 211, 221
Beatty, W.W. 150
Beethoven, L.v 198
Benenzon, R. 2
Bent, I. 132
Beresford-Peirse, S. 58, 235, 260
Berliner, P.F. 143
Bernières, L. de 167–8
Bernstein, L. 293
Bion, W. 24, 90, 102
Blake, W. 45–6, 310–12
Birtwistle, H. 163
Boccherini L. 299
Bogen, J.E. 150
Bolton, R. 18, 133, 143, 173, 255
Bonde, L.O. 159
Bonny, H.L. 2, 19, 233, 268, 296, 298
Bowlby, J. 171
Boxill, E. 253
Boyce-Tillman, J. 20
Brahms, J. 296
Britten, B. 60, 288
Brotons, M. 150
Brown, S.M.K. 16, 24, 35, 42, 85, 263,
266
Bruscia, K. 18, 20, 38, 43, 131, 154,
159, 231, 251, 253, 275, 277, 292,
306, 310–11, 313
Bunt, L. 3, 11, 13, 19–20, 71, 100, 154,
173, 231, 279–81, 294, 310, 316
Burns, S.J.I. 279–80, 284–7
Cage, J. 192
Campbell, J. 247
Capitani, E. 150
Carpy, D.V. 43
Cartwright, J. 22
Case, C. 21
Casement, P. 36, 38, 50, 263, 266
Chopin, F. 308–9
Christophers, D. 9
Clark, M. 292
Clarke, E. 147
Clarkson, P. 41
Name index

Clough, J. 18, 100
Cobb, N. 3
Cochrane, W.G. 272
Coleman, S. 18, 100–1, 103
Cook, N. 50
Cooper, S. 98
Cowan, J. 100
Crystal, H. 150
Cumberlege, Baroness 11
Dalley, T. 21
Darnley-Smith, D. 49–50
Dass, R. 263, 265
Davies, A. 18–19
Davies, J.B. 294
Davis, G. 261
Daykin, N. 287
Debussy, C. 59, 296, 300
Dickerson, G. 158
Dileo, C. 19, 34, 65
Dokter, D. 20
Dunmore, H. 9
Durham, C. 19
Dvorkin, J. 263, 266
Edwards, J. 275
Egan, G. 38
Eisler, J. 4, 53–5, 58–9, 64–5, 157, 235,
241, 260–1, 317
Engler, J. 293
Erdonmez, D. 115, 117, 295, 306; (also
known as Erdonmez Grocke, D.)
Ericsson, K. 98
Erikson, E.H. 34–5
Fenwick, A. 17
Ferrucci, P. 47
Ficino, M. 309–10
Fincher, S.F. 296–7
Flower, C. 19, 195
Forinash, M. 267
Fox, M. 310
Freud, S. 18, 35, 59, 173, 290
Frohne-Hagemann, I. 20
Gaarder, J. 174
Gabriel, P. 4
Gaggero, G. 215, 309
Gale, C.P. 100
Gantt, L. 251, 253, 255
Gardner, A. 99
Gardner, H. 83, 253
Gfeller, K. 275
344
The handbook of music therapy
Ghiberti 4
Gilroy, A. 21, 271, 289
Glinka 300
Gordon, H.W. 150
Gorman, P. 263, 265
Gouk, P. 20
Gray, A. 42–3, 258–9
Gregory, D. 251
Grocke, D. see Erdonmez
Guba 275
Haitink, B. 198
Harbuz, M. 279
Harper, C. 284
Harvey, J. 211
Hasler, J. 16
Hawkins, P. 165, 263–6
Haydn, J. 298
Heal Hughes, M. 18, 20, 24, 39, 100,
102
Heaney, S. 195
Hellier, H. 56
Hewett, D. 99
Hibben, J. 173
Higgins, R. 183
Hildegard of Bingen 310
Hillman, J. 35
Hinde, R. 36, 171
Holland, P. 19
Holst, G. 55, 313
Hooper, J. 100
Horden, P. 20
Hoskyns, S. 19, 314, 316
Howat, R. 24
Hozeski, B. 310
Hucklebridge, F. 279
Ibberson, C. 16
Isenberg-Grezda, C. 251
Janácek 211
Jennings, S. 46
Job 310–12
Jobim, A. 223
John, D. 24, 39
Jolliffe, T. 84
Jolly, H. 14–15, 158, 316
Jung, C.G. 18, 59, 92
Juslin, P. 20, 155, 294
Kellogg, J. 296
Kenny, C.B. 6, 310
Klein, J. 40

Klein, M. 18, 24, 34, 102
Koger, S.M. 150
Langenberg, M. 271
Lawes, C. 100
Lawrence, D.H. 209
Lee, C.A. 19, 21–2, 132, 254–5, 271
Lees, J. 17
Leuner, H. 233
Levinge, A. 16, 72, 102
Lewis, K. 292
Lincoln, Y.S. 275
Lindsay, B. 100
Liszt, F. 223
Loewy, J. 254
Loth, H. 20, 135
MacKenzie, K. 99
MacLaverty, B. 192
MacMillan, J. 306
Madsen, C. 2
Magee, W. 19, 115, 131
Malloch, S.N. 71
Mansell, J. 98
Marcello, B. 231
Marston-Wyld, J. 281
McIntosh, B. 98
McLean, S. 287
Messiaen O. 232
Michael, R. 234
Michel, D. 13
Michelangelo 194
Miller, L. 170
Moog, H. 154
Moore, G. 206
Moore, T. 188, 309
Mozart, W.A. 4, 210, 232
Muller, P. 16
Murray, G. 98
Mussorgsky, M. 4
Nachmanovitch, S. 49–51, 194
Nettl, B. 49
Nieman, A. 51, 58, 60–1, 63
Nind, M. 99
Nora, T. de 155
Nordoff, P. 2, 4, 12, 16, 29, 53–4, 59,
61–2, 85, 87–9, 117, 154, 157–8,
233–5, 242, 253
Odell-Miller, H. 4, 18, 20, 39, 53–6,
59–61, 64–5, 100, 102, 150–2, 157,
173, 235, 241, 261, 271, 273–4, 316
Name index
345
Okri, B. 172, 203, 318, 320
Oldﬁeld, A. 16, 83, 100, 233
O’Leary, C. 306
Orr, B. 56–7
Orton, R. 139
Ovid 290–1, 293, 295, 297, 301–3, 305–6
Pachelbel 296
Papousek, M. 71
Pavlicevic, M. 20–2, 24, 29, 45, 71–2,
100, 103, 154, 170–1, 173, 207, 264,
271–2, 277, 294
Pay, A. 50
Pedder, J. 35, 42
Pedersen, I.N. 38–9, 159
Pelham, G. 35
Phillips, A. 71, 290
Pickett, M. 61, 63–4, 195
Pines, M. 215
Pink Floyd 145
Plant, S. 17
Plato 291
Pople, A. 132
Praetorius 223
Pribham, K. 116
Priestley, M. 2, 18, 39, 42–3, 242, 264,
304
Purdie, H. 117
Racker, H. 43
Raphael, J. 228
Ravel, M. 296, 313
Reason, P. 273
Respighi 296
Richards, E. 19
Richer, J. 171
Ricks, D. 15, 158
Rinpoche, S. 318
Ritchie, F. 18, 100
Robarts, J. 16, 19–20, 72, 180, 288
Robbins, C. 2–4, 12, 16, 29, 53–4, 59,
61–2, 85, 88, 117, 154, 157, 233–4,
242, 253
Rogers, C. 38, 64
Rogers, P. 16, 20, 104, 158, 203, 206,
271
Rooley, A. 29, 200, 309–10
Rowan, J. 35, 38, 273
Rubbra, E. 57
Ruud, E. 2–3, 23, 29, 159, 271, 275
Sackett, D.L. 271
Sacks, O. 116, 173, 253, 310

St Bonaventure 277
Samson, S. 116
Santos, K. 135
Satie, E. 305
Savary, L.M. 233
Schenker, H. 132
Schubert, F. 300
Schumann, R. 3
Segal, H. 24
Shah, I. 149
Shakespeare, W. 211
Shohet, R. 165, 263–6
Shostakovich, D. 145
Sibelius, J. 298
Sidoli, M. 91
Siegel, S. 272
Simpson, F. 49–50, 117, 173–4, 180
Sinason, V. 18, 85, 98, 103, 114, 121–2
Sines, D. 99
Skille, O. 19, 274
Sloboda, A. 16, 18–20, 116, 133–5, 173,
255
Sloboda, J.A. 154–5, 173, 294
Small, C. 23, 50, 173, 310
Smeijsters, H. 271, 282
Smith, D.S. 253
Smyly, S.R. 99
Snedecor, G.W. 272
Sobey, K. 18, 20, 102
Sondheim, S. 46, 314
Spingte, R. 270, 274
Stacy, J. 35
Steele, P. 102–3
Steiner, R. 23
Stern, D. 22, 29, 71–2, 89, 102, 105,
134, 154, 186, 207
Stevens, J. 204
Stewart, D. 19, 102, 249, 260, 267
Stige, B. 23
Sting 192–3
Stokes, J. 18
Storr, A. 116
Strauss, R. 305
Stravinsky, I. 51
Streeter, E. 4, 13–14, 24, 43, 53–4,
56–7, 61–2, 64–5, 158, 180, 182, 234,
236, 241–2, 261, 268, 316
Stroman, S. 234
‘Sulís’ 284
Swartz, K. 150
346
The handbook of music therapy
Tarnas, R. 45, 291
Tate, D. 91
Tessimond, A.S.J. 203
Tinbergen, N. & E.A. 171–2, 179, 188
Tingle, E. 16
Tomlinson, J. 198
Toolan, P. 18, 100–1, 103
Torbert, W.R. 282
Towse, E. 19, 24, 39
Trehub, S. 71
Trevarthen, C. 29, 71, 150, 154
Trísan 232
Tschesnekoff 296
Turton, P. 287
Tustin, F. 72
Tyler, H. 20, 183
Usher, J. 131
van Velsen, C. 133–4
Verney, R. 182
Villa-Lobos 299
Vivaldi, A. 232
Voss, A. 309
Warwick, A. 16–17, 83
Watson, T. 18
Welldon, E. 133–4
Wheeler, B. 271
Whittaker, A. 98
Wigram, T. 4, 15, 18–20, 23, 53–4, 
57, 60–5, 100, 158–9, 236, 242, 251,
253, 262, 268, 271, 273–4, 279,
317–18
Wilber, K. 34–5, 44, 277–8, 284, 286,
289, 292–3
Williams, D. 72
Williams, W.E. 209
Wilson, B.L. 253
Wing, C. 84, 99
Winnicott, D.W. 22, 24, 32, 34, 40,
46–7, 59, 72, 88, 92, 95–6, 102, 198,
209
Woodcock, J. 19–20, 100, 102, 158
Zackey, G. 294, 306
Zanchi, B. 28, 215
Zatorre, R.J. 116
Zeldin, T. 47, 189
Zulueta, F. de 134

Aalborg, Denmark (University) 159,
236, 267 274
abuse 34, 85, 122, 191; of children 16;
see also sexual abuse
accompaniment: affecting mood 230; 
as frame for music 207; drone 218;
patterns 217, 222; pedal 230;
rhythmic ostinato 218, 220; styles
217, 230; supports 231–2; texture
231; see also melody, harmony
accompanying 206–9, 213, 216
addiction 14
adolescent 14
affect 71, 152, 154, 168, 170, 254; affect
attunement 89, 105, 207; affective
communication 105, 171; qualities of
affect 105–6
Alzheimer’s disease 150–2, 154–5
‘Amazing grace’ 228–30
Analysis (musical) 21, 132–3, 143,
173–4; of composed music 132,
231–2; development of material 147;
in music therapy 132, 137, 143, 147,
173–4; techniques 132, 147; see also
improvisation 
anger 90, 95–6, 122–4, 127, 153, 205,
304; acting out 96, 124; responses to
304
Anglia Polytechnic University,
Cambridge 12, 54, 267, 321
anxiety 257, 259, 316; therapist’s role in
containing 259; see also therapeutic
endings
archetypal images 92, 233, 295
art forms 169, 194
art therapy 21, 133, 135, 251, 289
assessment 5, 54, 101, 105–6, 108, 112,
119, 128, 183, 242–3, 251–5, 265–6,
269; descriptive analysis 254; of brain
damaged adult 122–4, 153, 155;
improvisation assessment proﬁle 253;
of pre-school child 15, 73–4, 316; 
re-assessment 82, 258; tools 251,
253–4; use of recordings of sessions
254–5; validity of procedure 254–5
Association for Music & Imagery
291–2
Association of Professional Music
Therapists (APMT) 2–3, 9–14, 33–4,
36, 53–4, 100, 182, 245, 247–9, 261,
263, 321, 325–7; code of ethics xix,
325–7; membership categories 12
ataxia 128, 130
attachment theories 134
attention 117; of child 17, 73;
concentration 127; selective 118; 
see also listening
aural training 163, 173–4
Australia 287
autism 4, 15–16, 20, 61, 69, 72–96, 117,
171–2, 195, 200, 267, 316; case
studies 20, 24, 69, 73–83; families of
autistic children 16; Harborough
School 58; re-assurance of numbers
86–8
autistic: savants 253; spectrum disorder
73, 82
autonomy 253; see also behaviour
behaviour: aggressive 191; avoidance
94, 124–5; ‘challenging’ 14–15, 99,
101, 180, 185, 250; communicative
169; controlling 84–5, 89–92;
destructive 33, 84, 91; dysfunctional
84, 122; in group 95; inappropriate
127; interactive 79; looking 75–8, 82,
Subject index

112; manipulative 15; motor control
253; musical 52, 102, 117, 190, 251,
253; non-musical behaviour manifest
in music 253; obsessional 84, 87–8,
187; as ordered ﬂow of events 172;
outside sessions 176; physical 169,
179–80; self-expression 253; self-
injury 191; social 169, 171; turn-
taking 14, 79, 81, 123–4, 126, 253;
unacceptable school behaviour 28,
205; undesirable 185; violent 33, 122,
191; withdrawing 42, 73, 76–7, 87–8,
313; see also vocalisation
behavioural problems 17, 122, 182, 205,
210, 316
Bologna 215
boundaries 32–5, 39, 44, 49, 51, 94,
262, 280, 313–15; breakdown 
of 35; challenging of 32, 123, 
126; consistent handling of 32;
developmental aspects 34–5;
emotional 32; exploration of 35, 89;
ground rules 33; of imagination 47;
musical 32, 34, 51, 111; physical 297;
of place & time 27–8, 32–3, 72, 104,
247; professional & ethical 33–4,
263, 266; psychological 32, 34–5,
297, 301, 305, 310; therapeutic 24,
29, 123, 205; use of instruments 191
brain damage 85, 115–17, 122, 127,
130, 150; cognitive disabilities in 115,
118, 120,; 127–30, 150, 152–3, 155
breathing see music (effects of ), sound,
rhythm
Bristol, University of 12, 57, 63, 321;
see also Cancer Help Centre,
University of the West of England
British Association of Art Therapists
11
British Medical Association 11–12
British Society for Music Therapy
(BSMT) 2, 3, 9, 54, 182, 322
burnout of therapist 46, 245
cancer 19, 197, 279, 284, 287, 316;
Cancer Help Centre, Bristol 270,
279–88
‘Captain Corelli’s Mandolin’ 167–9, 171
‘Care in the Community’ 17, 98–9, 
134; community teams 98–101, 104;
see also Social Services
case study 183, 255; structure 183
cat imagery 90–3
348
The handbook of music therapy
challenge 135–6, 148; see also
behaviour, boundaries
chaos 51, 84, 88, 90
charity 17; funding of short courses &
workshops 16; charitable trusts 18;
see also MusicSpace Trust
Chetham’s Music School 9
Child Protection 16, 34, 325
City University, London 267, 273
classroom management 17
clonus 117–18
code of conduct 12, 28; see also APMT
College of Paediatricians 15
coma 45
communication: disorders of 15, 54, 84,
253; emotional 103, 153, 207, 210;
indirect via instruments 77–8, 102,
207; of intention 15; layers of 168,
175, 180; musical in therapy 36, 39,
41, 103, 132, 153–4, 216; of needs by
patient 192, 258; non-verbal 22, 77–9,
102–3, 155, 158, 173, 272; pre-verbal
170, 212; role of music in 23, 41, 63,
77, 102, 104–5, 114, 150, 152–3, 155,
270, 308; shared with listener/partner
26; verbal 134; with non-verbal client
259; with parents & carers 249;
within small playing group 25
communication problems 13, 15, 64, 69,
71, 72, 99, 101, 259; verbal 28, 42,
82, 152–3, 155, 185, 271
complementary therapies 280, 282, 288
composition 57, 136
conﬁdence 82, 153; of clinician 266;
growth of 76–8, 157, 188, 200, 305
conﬁdential issues 191
conﬁdentiality xix, 101, 262; see also
APMT code of ethics
Congress; 5th European Music Therapy
Congress, Naples 2001 20–1, 23, 215;
World Congress: Paris 1983 158;
(9th), Washington 1999 2–3, 290;
(10th), Oxford 2002 24, 318
consciousness: altered state 291–2, 295,
299; level of 290, 314; modes of 38;
transformation in level 292–3, 301,
305, 310
consent 246–7, 284; for audio/visual
recording 251–2; forms 251–2;
withdrawal of consent 251
contact 40, 42, 106, 108–11, 121, 208;
body contact 176, 201; eye contact
176; see also elderly

containment 39–41, 51, 72, 75, 89–91,
93, 102, 124, 140, 190, 209–11, 266,
280, 313
contemplation 35
contract 263; of employment 248;
therapeutic 33, 45, 250
contrast: of pulses 202; of sounds 199
control 82, 94–5, 129–30, 136–7,
147–8; lack of 205; need for 84,
87–8, 111; of rhythm 152; of
situation 80, 88–9, 186, 214; of
sounds 77, 199, 209, 257; see also
behaviour, movements of body 
Council for Professions Supplementary
to Medicine (CPSM) 11–12, 100, 
241
counselling 268, 280–1; skills 212
counsellor 280, 284, 316
creative: exploration of music 90; 
music therapy 2, 22, 93, 147, 233;
opportunities 205; process 46–7, 49;
use of music in clinical setting 10,
209; use of rhythm 125; see also
improvisation, silence
creativity 32–3, 35, 43, 49, 56, 61, 63,
85, 87, 129, 143, 254, 268, 316;
limitations by brain damage 130
crisis intervention 16, 45
Czechoslovakia 55, 58–9
dementia 4, 69, 149–55, 173–4, 273;
Simultanagnosia 152–4; see also
Alzheimer’s Disease
Department of Health 97–8; see also
Whitley Council
depression 153, 155, 273, 316; manic-
depression 157
development; child 154, 158, 241, 258;
developmental proﬁle in music 253;
disorders of 253; human 51, 150;
musical 5, 29, 154; personal/social 5,
17, 35, 59, 72, 82–3, 88, 92, 94–7,
163–4, 189, 249; professional 249; 
of resources 189; vocal 154; see also
boundaries, speech & language
diabetes 191, 250
disciplinary committee 11
disciplinary procedure 327
doorways 2–4, 6
drama therapy 151
dreams 290
dynamic form see music therapy
dyspraxia 117
Subject index
349
eating disorders 15–16, 20; anorexia
nervosa 19
elderly 14, 20, 24, 69, 212, 265–6, 271,
273
emotion and music 20–1, 63, 123–4,
155, 205, 210, 294; music as language
of 3, 212; sharing 99, 120–1, 137, 210
emotional difﬁculties 14–15, 84–5, 99,
101, 122, 135, 205, 316; capacity 103,
147–8; denial 129; inner world 170,
172; maturation 14; needs 18, 126;
responses to infant needs 18, 126;
stability 26; see also communication
empathy 38, 42–3, 64, 119, 169, 182,
189–90, 203–6; musical 38–40,
203–4, 206
endings: of training 164, 178; see also
sound, therapeutic endings
ethology 169, 171–2
epilepsy 14–15, 191, 250; medication
for 123
ethnic musicians 241, 317
ethics committees 287; see also
boundaries, APMT
ethical standards 2
European Music Therapy
Confederation 54; see also congress
exploration: of accompaniment style
217; of consciousness 294, 301; 
of experiences 281; of intensity 
levels in music 200; of moods 82; 
of motivation 172; of movement 303;
of musical process 37, 50, 74, 93,
108–11, 137, 263; of objects 14; 
of sounds 193–4, 198–9, 202; see also
boundaries, feelings, instruments
expression: as music therapy technique
22–3, 148; channels of 105; of self
105, 127, 130, 132, 136; see also
improvisation, narrative
eyes of knowledge 277–8, 281, 284, 286
facilities: access to community f. 98;
audio–visual 30; for disabled 30;
observation rooms 30; storage see
instruments
fantasy 95–6, 270
feelings 25–6, 32, 182, 231, 281, 298–9,
305, 309; abandonment 257 259;
attending to present f. 46–7, 127,
129–30, 196, 214; communication of
36, 89, 114, 182, 257; containment of
40–1, 89–90, 93, 102, 129, 259;

experience of 38, 90, 120–1, 126–7,
139, 212; exploration of 37, 41, 95,
99, 102, 172, 208; expression of by
playing 33, 38, 41, 123–4, 205–6;
fear 77, 88 90, 93–4, 96, 124, 126,
153, 176, 192, 257, 262, 296; freedom
299, 302–3, 305; frustration 28, 94,
135, 155, 185, 205; inadequacy 124;
loss 48, 93, 95, 120–1, 126–8, 130,
153, 205, 259, 298–9; omnipotence
88, 92–3, 95; powerlessness 280;
reﬂection of by therapist 39, 121,
137, 204, 206–7; release 297, 302; 
of therapist 28, 36, 38–9, 43, 48, 
62, 111–12, 124, 205, 174, 176–7,
180, 262; self-worth 274, 303;
understanding of 38, 40, 43, 
139; well-being 283, 285–6, 305;
see also imagination, improvisation,
transference
Florence 4, 309
forensic: psychiatry 4, 14, 18, 69,
132–48, 267, 316; psychotherapy 20
fugue 293
funding 134, 250; Fund-raising 317; 
see also charity, research
games: musical 28
gender: issues in music therapy 310–11,
313–15; perspectives 313–14
gestalt 28, 152, 232
gesture 75, 78, 105–8, 111, 176, 180,
199, 204, 211, 265, 294; musical
87–8, 185, 187, 206–8, 231; sound
197
GIM see Guided Imagery & Music
goals (therapeutic) 10, 37
Great Round of the Mandala 296–7,
301–2
groups: 37, 151, 193, 199, 234;
assessment procedures and 253; 
case studies 20, 48, 105, 200, 202;
dynamics in 27, 48, 151, 178, 
197, 202; experiential groups for
students 54, 164, 182; improvisation
workshops 163, 177–9, 205, 208, 247;
listening 232–3, 313; music therapy
19, 22, 33, 45, 48, 51, 81–2, 101,
104–5, 151, 195, 280, 284–6; needs
for space 30; numbers in 248; open in
acute psychiatry 134; psychotherapy
& analysis 19, 212; reminiscence
therapy with 271; semi-open in
350
The handbook of music therapy
probation work 178–9; use of
instruments 32, 202, 247
Guided Imagery and Music (GIM): 2,
5, 19, 233, 243, 268, 280, 290–306,
311; choice of image 291, 296–7;
choice of music 233, 291, 296,
298–300, 305; form of session 291–2;
improvisation and 290–1, 303–5; role
of therapist 292; synchrony of images
with music 298–300; therapeutic
process 292, 306; as transformational
therapy 292, 294; see also
transformation
Guildhall School of Music & Drama
12, 54, 56, 58, 60–1, 63–4, 180, 321
handicap: secondary 85, 121–2, 130; 
see also physical disabilities
Hansard 11
harmonic: colour 230; progression 221,
223, 226; tension 146, 221
harmony: 49, 86–7, 135, 144–6, 154,
176, 216, 292, 294, 298, 300, 305;
cadential 221, 223, 226; chromatic
223; consonant 230; cycle of 5ths 221;
diatonic 223–4, 230; dissonance 38,
144–8; modal 145; one-note
turnarounds 223; pan-diatonic
progression 221; 12-bar blues 217,
224–5; two chord vamps 217, 226;
walking bass 225, 298–9
Harperbury School 99, 158
Harper House Children’s Service 15, 54
health 275
Health & Safety 27, 30, 191
healthcare 287
Health Professions Council 11
hearing impairments 13, 191
Hedonic tone see feeling of wellbeing
HIV/AIDS 14, 19, 21
hospices 13, 15, 299; childrens’ 16
hospitals 13, 98, 100, 134; Charing
Cross 158; Ealing 18; Fulbourn,
Cambridge 18; Goldie Leigh 12, 58,
61–2, 260; St Lawrence’s, Surrey 17
House of Lords 11
Huntington’s disease 115
hygiene of instruments 327
imagery & metaphor 3, 43, 173, 196–7,
199, 214–15, 232, 273, 277, 283;
musical metaphor 102, 129, 134, 288;
see also Guided Imagery & Music

imagination 29, 45–7, 49, 51–2, 
196, 210, 217, 232, 263, 266, 292;
development of 163, 169; as divine
principle 45–6, 309; in learning from
experience 47; link with feeling 46,
196, 203, 300; as music therapy tool
45–6, 169, 173, 189, 198, 203, 310; 
of therapist 46; types of 46; see also
boundaries
imaginative identiﬁcation 203
improvisation 3, 19, 23, 29, 39, 49–51,
56, 58–63, 100, 104, 132, 134–40,
143–9, 152–3, 158, 192, 242; analysis
of 21, 137, 143–7, 179–81, 186–7; 
contemporary instrumental
techniques 196; endings of piece
139–40; free association 43, 146–7,
213, 280; as a group 19, 163, 197,
200, 273; interactive 88, 91–2, 129,
137, 146–8, 185; intuition in action
49; led by client 90–2, 94, 100,
122–5, 140, 146–8, 235; led by
therapist 91, 145, 147, 202, 207, 304;
linked with verbal reﬂection 19, 104,
134, 137, 139, 197, 200, 207–8, 212,
214; rap 90; song 86–90, 92, 94–5,
117, 127, 129, 151, 197, 204–6, 209,
212–14; as story-telling 173, 203;
structures incorporated 117, 129,
139–40, 305; styles of 163, 213; 
in theatre and dance 49, 303–4;
therapist with patient 41, 49, 71–2,
75–6, 86–95, 104, 123–5, 137–42,
185–6, 214, 280, 304; training in 163,
204, 212–13, 216–30; use of tape
recorder 104, 134, 137, 143, 180; with
theme 49, 280, 303, 305; see also
assessment, groups, GIM, traditions
in music
improvisation (process): 22, 50, 137;
exploration 137, 139–40, 148, 273,
280, 304–5; expression of feelings
304; expression of needs of self 23,
205–6; self-expression 137, 139–40,
153, 200
improvisation (structures): 216, 
221, 232, 280; based on form of
composed piece 305; based on poem
213; boogie bass line 220; call &
response 220, 280; exercises 216;
lyrics added to melody 213–14, 222;
obligato melody 204; ostinatos 220;
pulse-based 280; repeated chord
Subject index
351
sequences 137, 145–6; rhythmic 
220, 305; starting points 217, 220;
transposition 222
improvisation (uses of ): containment 
& transformation by 90–2, 108, 111,
129, 140, 304, 313; in supervision
264; reﬂection of feeling state 89, 
95, 104, 112, 121, 203, 205–6,
214–15; to synchronise with client’s
movements; 119, 201
Independent, the 9, 306
instrumental music 231–3, 280
instruments: 27–30, 74–9, 88–9, 104,
112, 119–20, 123–4, 130, 132, 136,
151, 201, 204, 284, 303, 310–13,
323–4; age-appropriate 191; beaters
30, 79, 191; choice of 30, 86, 90–1,
94, 106, 108, 120, 122, 125–6, 129,
137, 176, 178, 190–1, 196, 198,
205–6, 214; dynamic issues 191;
exploration of 74, 82, 87, 120, 
125, 128, 139, 180, 196–8, 202, 
208; for use by disabled 131, 191–2;
for harmonic support 30; insurance
30, 191, 248; as intermediary 
objects 197–8, 214; maintenance 
30; from other cultures 30, 196;
quality & range of 29–30, 51, 
104–5; stands 30; storage of 30; 
tone colour 30, 73, 79, 120, 125, 129,
195–6, 207, 213, 232; see also health
& safety 
insurance 248, 327; see also instruments
intelligence 29, 49, 51, 97–8, 103; 
see also musical intelligence
interaction: cross-modality 106–8, 112,
207; in GIM 293; and history 36;
mother–child 13, 22, 24, 34, 40,
75–6, 78–82, 102, 105, 154, 170–1,
177, 183, 209, 314; with music 168,
173; musical 14, 40, 71, 74, 87–8,
93–4, 100, 102–5, 109–11, 132,
136–7, 147, 154, 171, 185–6, 207,
232; in music therapy 29, 51–2, 
64, 83, 90–6, 105, 172, 176, 179; 
of words with music 214
internet 9, 317
interpretation 214–15, 273, 288–9
intimacy 35, 40, 304
intuition: 29, 40, 45, 47–9, 51–2, 63–4,
270, 289, 309; and assessment 253;
processes in music therapy 132, 159,
179, 189, 215, 310

Jessie’s Fund 16
journal see research, GIM
journey: cyclical nature 315; in music
167–8; in therapy 168, 189, 294–5,
301, 306; in training 164–5;
journeying 216, 308, 315
keys 3, 292; see also music (nature of )
language: body 182; descriptive 
254; development 14; I/IT 278;
interpreters 215; retrieval in 
brain damage 117; technical 100;
terminology for learning disabled 
98; tonal 234
learning difﬁculties 13–15, 61, 64,
97–114, 170; adults 4, 13–14, 17–18,
24, 69, 121–2, 180, 271; children
13–14, 16, 197, 210, 214; deﬁnition
97–8; difﬁculties with relationships
99; need for independent living
support 98–9; The King’s Fund 99;
see also special schools
listening 58, 86, 93, 126, 188, 199, 
203, 217, 254, 280, 282–4, 320;
approaches 231–3; to child within 
62; choice of music 284, 296; in
group playing 25; in GIM 292, 
305; as music therapy technique 
19, 22, 38–9, 59, 81, 125, 192, 207; 
to provide a stimulus 232–3;
therapist-directed 233, 280, 284–6;
use of live musicians see music
therapy techniques
listening skills: 5, 169–83, 201;
evolution of in training 187–8;
exercises for internal focus 193;
interpretation of information 169,
174–5, 177, 179–84, 186–8; open
listening as training 217, 231–3;
practice 163, 201; prompts 177;
transcription of recorded session
180–2, 254–5 
Local Education Authorities 13, 16–17
London Learning Disability Strategy
Group 101
‘Mary Poppins’ 205–6
media, newspapers 9
meditation 280; use of rainstick as
focus for 197
melody 71, 85, 145, 154, 176, 200–1,
216, 219, 222, 230–2, 292, 294;
352
The handbook of music therapy
counter-melody 230; decoration of
231–2; pentatonic 230; rhythmic
shape of 300; shape 224, 231–2,
298–300; as storyline 231; vocal 222,
226, 230
memory 82, 117, 127, 129, 177;
impairment in dementia 152; musical
79, 153; use of music to access 117,
209, 294; use of song to learn
sequences 117
mental handicap see learning disability
mental health: adult 18–19, 54, 99;
problems 13–15, 33, 101, 136, 195,
200; services 135; see also offenders
misconduct see disciplinary procedure
monastic traditions 35
mood adjective checklist 283–4, 289
mood changes 286, 299, 309; see also
music (nature of )
motivation: 254, 257; of character 210;
of children 17, 211; of therapist 275;
to train as music therapist 53, 159
movement of body: 105–8, 117–18, 
176; control of 117, 274; cultural
differences 183; development of skills
35, 97; loss of 310; preferred speed
76, 208; in relation to sounds 76, 93,
109–11, 118, 120, 154, 174, 182, 199,
303–4; use of to reﬂect feelings 204;
stillness 186; synchronised with
sound 75, 89, 117
movement problems 117, 128, 130; 
see also ataxia, clonus, dyspraxia
multiple sclerosis 115, 128
music (effects of ): on atmosphere of
group 202, 232, 265–6; arousal 75–6,
80, 82, 286; associations 233; on
behaviour 39, 80, 81, 94, 117, 126; 
on breathing 119–20, 197, 199;
calming 40, 81, 97, 287, 304; on
feelings 40, 80, 277, 304; healing
potential 85; on immune system 
283, 287; on physical feeling 205;
physiological 44, 199, 277–8; relaxing
233, 283, 285; spiritual 44, 277, 287;
on thinking 277; see also feelings of
therapist
music (nature of ): accent 71; atonal
140, 147; articulation 132; blending
25; contrasts 147, 186, 304; form 61,
85, 104, 129, 145–8, 216, 231–2, 288,
292–3, 305; imitative 108, 147, 232;
key 137, 144, 146, 153, 292–3;

loudness 199, 304; modulation 292;
mood 129, 145, 148, 153, 197, 207,
218–19, 231–2, 293, 296, 299, 304;
non-verbal nature of 316; phrase
length & shape 25, 40, 75, 92, 
129, 144–6, 174, 186–7, 218, 299;
repetition 40, 91, 117, 137, 147, 176,
216, 254; stress 71; structure 40, 87,
89, 139–40, 146, 149, 152, 174, 186,
290, 293, 298; styles 49, 144–5, 287;
tempo 71, 74, 85–91, 93, 112, 120,
124, 137, 146–7, 201, 167, 202, 227;
texture 46, 124, 146, 231–2, 304;
tonality 298; variation 49, 91, 93, 
95, 128, 137, 140, 145, 220, 288, 293,
295, 305; see also harmony, tone
quality, pitch, pulse, rhythm
music (responses to) 62, 106, 155;
emotional 155, 167–8, 195, 231;
intuitive 48
music (uses of ): to establish boundaries
34, 91; by client 39, 41, 50, 
82–3, 91–2, 103, 117, 127–8; as
communication 23, 63, 75, 82, 127,
152–3, 209, 152–4, 208; means of
contact 40–1, 77–8, 100, 102, 112,
121, 130, 208, 211; as co-therapist in
GIM 306; as means of expression 50,
56, 71, 73–4, 80, 92, 96, 121, 124,
152, 257–8; to facilitate 208; to hold
feelings 40–1, 209, 299; expression of
identity 23, 46, 236; to reﬂect internal
world 102–3, 105, 121, 133, 207,
257–8; refusal to play 94; social
integration 82; as therapeutic tool 
15, 20, 39–41, 50–1, 72, 76–8, 85,
90–1, 94, 100, 102–5, 117, 129, 140;
by therapist 39, 41, 91, 94, 103–4,
106–8, 117, 119, 207–8, 216, 235;
see also emotion
‘music child’ 157
‘musicking’ 23, 130, 310
music technology 324; music writing
programmes 324
music therapist: 20, 37, 98; active
playing role 175, 189, 192, 206;
attendant listener 37, 175, 182, 189,
195, 209; clinical background 163,
246, 314; clinical orientation 2, 190,
212, 275; facilitator 37, 205, 280, 284;
inter-disciplinary teams 12, 17, 21,
33, 51, 85, 100–1, 104, 116, 118, 130,
134–5, 140, 152, 157–8, 190, 
Subject index
353
255, 271, 273, 280, 316; musical
background 25–6, 53, 558, 163, 268,
276, 314, 317; observer 51, 80, 105–6,
151, 195; personal therapy 102;
posture 37, 204; self-conﬁdence 37,
188; use of co-therapist 248, 265; 
see also supervision, support role,
training
music therapy: 10–11, 19–23, 136, 235,
242; as career option 9, 25, 54; with
adults 17–19, 22, 32, 50, 64, 69,
97–114; with children 13–17, 32, 45,
61–2, 64, 69, 71–96, 154, 157, 185–7,
205–8, 242, 253, 256–8; compared
with talking therapies in dementia
150; children with disabilities 316;
with dying 130, 316; familiarity of
‘tools’ 191; humour 318; ‘dynamic
form’ 21, 71, 103–4, 207, 215, 265–6,
294; in education system 16–17, 45,
84, 86–96, 241, 316; individuals 45,
72–81, 85, 101–2, 191, 197, 232–3;
jobs 245–7, 318; long-term effects
80–3, 96, 101, 121, 127, 155, 258–9;
music-centered 280; with musically
accomplished patient 135–6, 152–4;
musical tools 174; objectives 37, 
51, 85, 88, 106, 118, 130, 133, 135,
153, 183, 256–8, 260, 275; outcome
257, 274; physiological approach 
44; potential effects 85, 102, 118;
professional status 2, 53, 270; in
psychiatry 18–19, 45, 53, 64, 133,
135–6, 153–5, 212; psychological
changes 282; qualiﬁcations 11; self-
employment 248; settings of work 13,
17, 45, 101, 134–5, 176–7, 245, 247,
275; sources of information 9, 245;
spectrum 44–5, 212, 241; state
registration 10–11, 12, 54, 100, 237,
241–2, 316–17; structure of sessions
32–3, 79, 82, 85, 104, 130, 151, 211,
257, 280; styles of work 44, 64, 85,
100, 133, 212; target behaviour 96,
118, 122, 257; therapeutic process 4,
20–2, 33, 37, 39, 42, 97, 101–2, 164,
182, 271, 273–4, 276, 281; treatment
models 164; use of by client 29; use
of live music 48, 81, 207, 280, 282–6;
use of pre-recorded music 24, 233,
268, 280, 282–5, 291–2, 294, 296,
298–300, 305; use of pre-composed
music 48, 89, 93–5, 100, 117, 129,

136–7, 151, 205–6, 211, 231–3, 273;
use of recordings 304; see also
groups, GIM, improvisation, 
music therapy (styles): 2, 64, 85,
241–3, 313–14; developmental 44–5,
277; holistic 316; humanistic 44, 
263, 280; physiological 44–5, 277;
psychodynamic 44–5, 97, 102–4, 
263, 277; supportive 44–5, 262; 
trans-personal 44, 47, 280, 282
musical responses: 41, 62, 74, 124–5;
interactive 75, 86, 88, 91–3, 109–11,
180, 182, 304; synchronous 79, 120,
154, 180
musical: intelligence 83, 253, 257;
resistance 85, 87, 137; skills 58, 61,
63, 116, 135–6, 153, 326; structure
117, 132, 137
MusicSpace 317; West Midlands 316
MusicSpace Trust 15, 17
narrative 149, 151, 154–5, 254; skills
173; therapist as musical narrator
152–3 
National Health Service 13; mental
health team 18; NHS Trusts 17, 99
needs: assessment of 169; of cancer
patients 280, 282, 288; developmental
316; emotional 18, 33, 80, 96, 258;
focus on in music therapy 172; of
individual patient 23, 27, 33, 37, 45,
64, 76–7, 80, 96, 98, 101, 104, 151,
192, 198, 304, 310, 314; psychological
18, 82; therapist’s understanding of
28, 76–8
neuroendocrinology 279
neurological problems 13–14, 19,
115–30; creative use of disability 117;
rehabilitation unit 116, 118; music as
clinical tool 117
neurology 4, 21, 69, 158, 267, 316
neuroplasticity 116, 122
neuropsychological tests 120
Nordoff-Robbins: approach 16, 22–3,
85, 180; reed horns 78, 87, 124–5,
324
Nordoff-Robbins Centre 12, 16, 54,
235, 260–1, 267, 321
nursing homes 13, 116, 121, 128
observation 165, 167–72, 175–80,
201–2; approach changes during
training 187–8; of context of music
354
The handbook of music therapy
therapy 175–7; importance of 
169; interpretation of information
169, 174–5, 179, 184, 186–8; 
of live therapy session 175, 178–9;
prompts 176–7, 179; of self 169–70,
178–9; skills 5, 169–80, 182; use of
audio/visual tape 175, 177, 179, 184,
208; use of clinical knowledge 187–8
occupational therapy 12, 30, 118–19,
135–6
offenders 19, 133; mentally disordered
134; offending behaviour 134
pace: of music 38, 49, 86, 298; of
working 14, 106, 208
palliative care 19, 127, 267
Parkinson’s disease 115, 117, 274, 277,
310
passport 17
pathology 10, 85, 88–9
psychopathology 133
patterns: 71, 84, 103, 169, 171, 173; 
as element of music 40, 51, 71, 
75–6, 79, 87, 122, 129, 137, 176, 187,
192, 200, 216; in GIM 290, 295–6,
298–306; in nature 309; for reading
behaviour 170; of research 279;
rigidity of 200; of words 40, 46; of
work in music therapy 37
perceptual skills 169–70, 175, 188
performance 308–9
perspective 84, 96, 100, 127, 133
philosophy: 44, 169, 174, 215, 273,
276–7; of Bristol Cancer Help Centre
279–80, 287–8; of different cultures
293
physical disabilities: 16, 33, 85, 115–31,
191, 208, 316; dyspraxia 28; hearing
13, 191; spastic quadriplegia 194;
visual 13, 118, 128, 191; see also
facilities for disabled
physical skills 14, 97
physiological problems 19
physiotherapy 30, 250, 316
pitch: 71, 77, 86–7, 112, 146, 154, 167,
176, 199, 201, 207–8; awareness of
25; inﬂections in speech 213;
intonation 25, 126
play: 14, 47, 52, 73, 93, 95–6, 187;
imaginative 80, 257; with instruments
30; interactive 83, 93; symbolic 80,
84; use of toys 80–1; vocal 14
play therapy 173

postgraduate training 12; see also
training 
pre-school children 69, 71–83; special
needs 81–2
prisons 13–14
Professions Supplementary to Medicine
Act 1960 11; Arts Therapists Board
11–12
psychoanalysis: 59, 170–1, 214, 261;
clinical theories applied to music
therapy 21, 24, 29, 39–45, 53, 61, 72,
102, 104, 130, 132, 134, 157–8, 235;
ego 35, 44, 91; Freudian 261; Jungian
16; psychodynamic 20, 22, 44, 102,
263; regression 185; resistance 18, 44;
shadow 18, 35, 44, 313; techniques to
access unconscious 18, 42, 102; use
of improvisation 41; see also
containment, transference
psychoneuroimmunology 282
psychophysiology 279, 185
psychotherapy 169–70, 174, 182, 242,
254–5, 258–60, 268, 279, 291, 316; 
personal therapy of therapist 264, 266
psychotic: children 16; medication for
136; patients 24; violence 20, 136
pulse: 71, 75, 85, 88, 90, 122–3, 125,
128, 147, 185–7, 190, 200–3, 207–8;
as cohesive factor in groups 201–2;
as container 202, 231–2; use as
structural base 280
referral 248–51, 256, 269, 316, 326;
practicalities 243, 245; forms 249–50;
reasons for 85, 97, 99, 101, 105, 118,
122, 128, 135–6, 153, 183, 211,
256–7, 265
Register of Therapists 11–12
relationships: in music therapy 10–11,
24, 27, 29, 35–9, 41–3, 85, 88, 90–6,
102–4, 127, 130, 132, 135, 147–8,
151, 154, 186–7, 211, 245, 253, 257,
263–4; within client’s family 72,
82–3; as evolving dynamic process
35–6, 137, 139, 148, 264; personal
23, 36, 99, 127, 304–5; between
personnel in therapy space 29, 176,
265–6; between student and therapist
176; in teamwork 33–4; through
music-making 133, 140, 148, 155,
157, 206; with outside world 23, 83;
between sounds 23; see also
boundaries
Subject index
355
reports 255–8, 269
research: 2, 5, 10, 12, 16, 18, 21–3, 29,
53–4, 100, 105, 149–50, 159, 242–3,
267, 269–89; approach 275–9, 281–2,
284, 287, 289; collaborative 279–89;
evidence-based practice 174, 271,
282; funding 275, 283, 287; historical
studies 273; orientation 277–9, 281–2,
287–8; paradigm 275
research (methodology): 267, 271, 275,
282–5; applied to music therapy 23,
105–13, 150, 289; bias 287, 311;
choice of music for listening 284,
287; and clinical experience 274, 
289; controls 272, 276, 287; data
presentation 273, 288; focus 
groups 282–6, 289; interviews 287;
journal-keeping 287; outcome studies
271–2; physiological measures 282–3,
286–8; psychological measures 282,
285–6; randomised control trials 
150, 271–2; saliva tests 283–5, 289;
statistical analysis 272, 276, 284–6;
triangulation 273; variables 272, 276;
validity of procedures 272–3, 275–6,
278, 282–3; use of video-recordings
105; see also interpretation
residential care 98
resistance 294, 313 
resonance 38, 42, 290, 292, 294, 298,
300; with feelings 204, 306; musical
38, 43, 204–5, 230; therapeutic
concept 38–9, 43, 103, 190, 204, 215,
292
resources 5, 17, 135, 192, 209, 215, 233;
local resource centres 18
rhythm 13, 49, 71, 85, 105, 154, 158,
176, 292, 294; and breathing 119–20,
201, 208, 299; emotional response to
120, 201; in nature 192; of breathing
201, 208, 299; pulse 75, 90, 123, 125,
200–3; matching 86, 91, 111, 120,
123, 186; see also improvisation,
melody, tension
rhythmic: entrainment 201; grooves
217, 227; patterns 74, 86, 122, 125,
128, 152, 216, 298–9; responses 75;
structure 85, 90, 117; styles 220, 222,
225, 227
ritual 35, 84, 88
risk-assessment 134, 190
risk-taking 46–8, 123, 139, 254, 309–10,
314

role-playing: in supervision 264; as
training technique 163, 201, 204–5,
207–8, 210
Roehampton Institute 12, 18, 20, 54,
102, 170, 261, 321
Royal College of Music 55
safety 32–3, 35, 37, 39, 87–90, 94, 111,
122, 124, 185, 187, 190, 202, 205,
207, 212, 231, 258–9, 262, 280, 289,
300–1, 304–5, 310, 314–15
St Paul’s Girls’ School 55
scale: modes 217–18, 221; pentatonic
219–20, 224–5; tetrachord 219; 
see also traditions in music 
schizophrenia 38, 157
schools 13, 16–17, 45; pre-school
specialist 13, 17; special schools 13,
16
Scotland 12, 22
Secure Unit 134–6
self-awareness 182
sensory impairment 250; see also
hearing impairments, visual
impairment
sexual abuse 15, 191, 210, 267
shadow see psychoanalysis
silence: 23, 32, 71, 112, 119, 130, 199,
203, 309; exercises to explore 193;
music as frame for 193; use of 14,
189–90, 192, 194–5, 208, 318, 320
Social: care 287; difﬁculties 84, 89, 
99, 122, 200; interaction 84, 176;
maturation 14; skills 97–8, 176;
worker 135; see also development:
social
Social Services 13, 99, 245; see also
Care in the community 
sound: 6, 85, 105, 193–6, 201, 207–8,
210; endings of 199; in nature 197;
intensity 213; loudness 71, 74, 82,
87–8, 91, 93, 120, 124–5, 129, 132,
137, 154, 176, 185–6, 190, 198–201,
207–8, 216; reactions to 196–8;
related to breathing 197, 201;
sampled wind sounds 232; see also
pitch, vocalisation
Southlands College see Roehampton
Institute
space 4, 29, 33, 51, 102, 104, 304, 310,
314, 318; involvement of other
people 48, 72–81; physical 30, 32,
105, 192; feeling 46, 90, 102, 108,
356
The handbook of music therapy
112, 186, 205, 292; musical see
accompanying; perception of 277,
296; personal 78, 180, 201; shared 93;
around notes see silence
special needs 82, 234; see also school:
special
Statement of special educational needs
17, 82, 241
speech & language 58, 82, 97, 114, 118,
120, 122, 154, 172, 180, 194, 211,
214, 257; absence of in disability 208;
development of 14, 35, 73, 154, 170,
202; loss of 151–3, 170; melody of
211
speech therapy 12, 60, 120, 250, 316
spontaneity 46, 48–9, 51, 88, 90, 100,
136, 147, 209–10, 213, 215, 280; in
dementia 150; of young child 71, 150,
154
story-telling 172–3, 198, 206, 231, 257;
case-study as a story 183, 203, 208
stress management 14, 19
stress level measurement 283; cortisol
283, 285
stroke 45, 115, 118–21
students 19, 30, 48, 54, 59–60, 64, 81,
135, 159, 164, 327; development
frame for training 164–5; reaction
with patients 174, 176; personal
therapy 15, 164, 182, 237; qualities
needed 25–6, 164, 308
styles of music: 143, 206, 213, 221, 
230, 232–3; blues 143, 223–5; jazz 
63, 143, 163, 206, 226, 234; see also
accompaniment
supervision: 5, 10, 12, 33–4, 39, 43,
53–4, 102–4, 121, 131–2, 192, 242–3,
249, 252, 260–7, 269, 301; counter-
transference in 264; development 
of scheme 260–2; in employment 
248; in GIM 306; group 164, 171,
175, 177–9, 260, 265–6; individual
164, 263; use of music 264, 266; in
other countries 261–2; in student
placements 15, 164, 175–7, 179, 235,
247
support role of music therapist 40, 44,
64, 72, 101, 117, 206, 212, 314;
communication 37, 39, 77–8;
expression of emotion 44; feelings 
37, 44, 95, 130, 151; group skills 247,
see also groups; music 77, 126, 151,
265; of families of patient 316

Tavistock Clinic 18, 99
tempo see music (nature of )
tension 32, 36, 148, 283, 285–6, 288,
304, 313
therapeutic: attitude 37, 169, 174;
endings 95, 130, 178, 216, 245, 251,
258–60; massage 280; orientation
263; presence 37, 130; see also
relationship
time: 37, 84, 104, 152, 202, 248, 277,
292; framework of client 208, 297,
300; see also boundaries
tone quality: 116, 129, 154, 176, 195,
207, 213, 292, 304; tone of voice 182,
211; see also instrument
touch 119
traditions: in music 35, 49–50, 219–20,
222, 226, 233; cultural differences 35,
49–50, 317; improvisation and 49–50,
143; pentatonic sets 217; see also
research, scale 
training: 12, 25–6, 46, 53–4, 58–64,
102, 135, 159, 163–237, 243; clinical
317; course requirements 25–6;
courses 12, 20, 25, 236, 242–3, 
321–2; experiential 182, 236; family
services 316; further training 243,
245, 249, 267–9, 316–17, 326;
placements 15, 164, 175–7, 179, 
235, 247; psychological & medical
studies 164, 170; use of recorded
sessions 180–2; in use of words
211–15
transference/countertransference 41–3,
45, 102, 121, 130, 140, 157, 205, 215,
264
transformation: 5, 290–6, 301–7; by art
318–320; in music 292–3, 298–301;
psychological 293, 295, 297, 299,
301–2; see also consciousness
Subject index
357
trust: damage to 289; establishment of
33–4, 36, 76–7, 88, 90, 127, 202, 206,
211, 257, 280–1; of self 192
University of: Nijmegen, The
Netherlands 267; Wales Institute of
Science & Technology 283; West 
of England, Bristol 267; Witten
Herdecke, Germany 23, 267
UWIST test 283–6
verbal reﬂection on music 19, 21
vibro-acoustic therapy 274
visual impairment 13, 118, 152, 185–6,
191; see also physical disabilities
vocalisation: 38, 74–6, 78–9, 84, 86, 90,
103, 108–12, 120–1, 137, 176, 180,
190, 272, 305; wordless 201, 204, 208;
see also containment
vocal music 40, 86, 89, 112, 233, 300
Welsh College of Music & Drama 12,
322
Whitley Council of Department of
Health 11, 13; career & grading
structure 245
Williams Syndrome 258
wondering 168, 171, 174, 177–9, 202,
211, 320
words: 214, 318, 320; blocks to
emotional expression 212, 318; in
GIM images 299–300; styles of music
with words 214; use of in music
therapy 22, 39–40, 49, 82, 86, 89,
103, 212, 280
World Federation of Music Therapy 2,
54; see also Congress
World Health Organisation 97
‘Yellow Submarine’ 93–5

